libsycl/docs/index.rst, before:

=====================
SYCL runtime implementation
=====================

.. contents::
   :local:

.. _index:

Current Status
========

The implementation is in the very early stages of upstreaming. The first milestone is to get
support for a simple SYCL application with device code using Unified Shared Memory:

.. code-block:: c++

   #include <sycl/sycl.hpp>
   
   class TestKernel;
   
   int main() {
     sycl::queue q;
   
     const size_t dataSize = 32;
     int *dataPtr = sycl::malloc_shared<int>(32, q);
     for (int i = 0; i < dataSize; ++i)
       dataPtr[i] = 0;
   
     q.submit([&](sycl::handler &cgh) {
       cgh.parallel_for<TestKernel>(
           sycl::range<1>(dataSize),
           [=](sycl::id<1> idx) { dataPtr[idx] = idx[0]; });
     });
     q.wait();
   
     bool error = false;
     for (int i = 0; i < dataSize; ++i)
       if (dataPtr[i] != i) error = true;
   
     free(dataPtr, q);
   
     return error;
   }

This requires at least partial support of the following functionality on the libsycl side:
  * ``sycl::platform`` class
  * ``sycl::device`` class
  * ``sycl::context`` class
  * ``sycl::queue`` class
  * ``sycl::handler`` class
  * ``sycl::id`` and ``sycl::range`` classes
  * Unified shared memory allocation/deallocation
  * Program manager, an internal component for retrieving and using device images from the multi-architectural binaries

Build steps
========

To build LLVM with libsycl runtime enabled the following script can be used.

.. code-block:: console

  #!/bin/sh

  build_llvm=`pwd`/build-llvm
  installprefix=`pwd`/install
  llvm=`pwd`
  mkdir -p $build_llvm
  mkdir -p $installprefix

  cmake -G Ninja -S $llvm/llvm -B $build_llvm \
        -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS="clang;clang-tools-extra" \
        -DLLVM_INSTALL_UTILS=ON \
        -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$installprefix \
        -DLLVM_ENABLE_RUNTIMES="libcxx;libcxxabi;libsycl;libunwind" \
        -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release

  ninja -C $build_llvm install

Commit message:

[SYCL] Add platform enumeration and info query using liboffload (#2)
This is part of the SYCL support upstreaming effort. The relevant RFCs can
be found here:

https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-full-support-for-the-sycl-programming-model/74080
https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-sycl-runtime-upstreaming/74479

The SYCL runtime is device-agnostic and uses liboffload for offloading to GPU.
This commit adds a dependency on liboffload, implementation of platform::get_platforms, platform::get_backend and platform::get_info methods, initial implementation of sycl-ls tool for manual testing of added functionality.

Plan for next PR:

device/context impl, rest of platform
test infrastructure (depends on L0 liboffload plugin CI, our effort is joined)
ABI tests

libsycl/docs/index.rst, after:

=====================
SYCL runtime implementation
=====================

.. contents::
   :local:

.. _index:

Current Status
========

The implementation is in the very early stages of upstreaming. The first milestone is to get
support for a simple SYCL application with device code using Unified Shared Memory:

.. code-block:: c++

   #include <sycl/sycl.hpp>
   
   class TestKernel;
   
   int main() {
     sycl::queue q;
   
     const size_t dataSize = 32;
     int *dataPtr = sycl::malloc_shared<int>(32, q);
     for (int i = 0; i < dataSize; ++i)
       dataPtr[i] = 0;
   
     q.submit([&](sycl::handler &cgh) {
       cgh.parallel_for<TestKernel>(
           sycl::range<1>(dataSize),
           [=](sycl::id<1> idx) { dataPtr[idx] = idx[0]; });
     });
     q.wait();
   
     bool error = false;
     for (int i = 0; i < dataSize; ++i)
       if (dataPtr[i] != i) error = true;
   
     free(dataPtr, q);
   
     return error;
   }

This requires at least partial support of the following functionality on the libsycl side:
  * ``sycl::platform`` class
  * ``sycl::device`` class
  * ``sycl::context`` class
  * ``sycl::queue`` class
  * ``sycl::handler`` class
  * ``sycl::id`` and ``sycl::range`` classes
  * Unified shared memory allocation/deallocation
  * Program manager, an internal component for retrieving and using device images from the multi-architectural binaries

Build steps
========

To build LLVM with libsycl runtime enabled the following script can be used.

.. code-block:: console

  #!/bin/sh

  build_llvm=`pwd`/build-llvm
  installprefix=`pwd`/install
  llvm=`pwd`
  mkdir -p $build_llvm
  mkdir -p $installprefix

  cmake -G Ninja -S $llvm/llvm -B $build_llvm \
        -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS="clang" \
        -DLLVM_INSTALL_UTILS=ON \
        -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$installprefix \
        -DLLVM_ENABLE_RUNTIMES="offload;openmp;libsycl" \
        -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release

  ninja -C $build_llvm install


Limitations
========

SYCL runtime is not tested and is not guaranteed to work on Windows because offloading runtime (liboffload) used by SYCL runtime doesn't currently support Windows.
The limitation to be revised once liboffload will add support for Windows.
