# LLVM AI Tool Use Policy

LLVM's policy is that contributors can use whatever tools they would like to
craft their contributions, but **contributors must read and review all
LLM-generated code or text before they ask other project members to review
it.** The contributor is always the author and is fully accountable for their
contributions. Contributors should be sufficiently confident that the
contribution is high enough quality that asking for a review is a good use of
scarce maintainer time.

We expect that new contributors will be less confident in their contributions,
and our guidance to them is to start with small contributions that they can
fully understand to build confidence. We aspire to be a welcoming community
that helps new contributors grow their expertise, but learning involves taking
small steps, getting feedback, and iterating. Passing maintainer feedback to an
LLM doesn't help anyone grow, and does not sustain our community.

The most important question in shared, foundational open source infrastructure
is often not whether something can be done (many things are possible), but
whether what's proposed makes a good tradeoff amongst all of the many competing
objectives of the project contributors.

The most important implication of our policy is that we'd like to ban agents
that take action in our digital spaces without human supervision. For example,
we don't think GitHub copilot is good enough to have it post review comments
for everyone to see. However, LLM tools that propose suggested edits subject to
human approval are allowed. As another example, many areas of LLVM are
underdocumented. Using an LLM to generate documentation, which a contributor
manually reviews for correctness, edits, and then posts as a PR, is an approved
use of tools under this policy.

TODO: Edit down the remainder

---

LLVM's policy on AI-assisted tooling is fundamentally liberal -- We want to
enable contributors to use the latest and greatest tools available. However,
human oversight remains critical. **The contributor is always the author and is
fully accountable for their contributions.**

* **You are responsible for your contributions.** AI-generated content must be
  treated as a suggestion, not as final code or text. It is your responsibility
  to review, test, and understand everything you submit. Submitting unverified or
  low-quality machine-generated content (sometimes called "[AI
  slop][ai-slop]") creates an unfair review burden on the community and is not
  an acceptable contribution. Contributors should review and understand their own
  submissions before asking the community to review their code.

* **Start with small contributions:** Open source communities operate on trust
  and reputation. Reviewing large contributions is expensive, and AI tools tend
  to generate large contributions. We encourage new contributors to keep their
  first contributions small, specifically below 150 additional lines of
  non-test code insertions, until they build personal expertise and maintainer
  trust before taking on larger changes.

* **Be transparent about your use of AI.** When a contribution has been
  significantly generated by an AI tool, we encourage you to note this in your
  pull request description, commit message, or wherever authorship is normally
  indicated for the work. For instance, use a commit message trailer like
  Assisted-by: <name of code assistant>. This transparency helps the community
  develop best practices and understand the role of these new tools.

* **LLVM values Your Voice.** Clear, concise, and authentic communication is
  our goal. Using AI tools to translate your thoughts or overcome language
  barriers is a welcome and encouraged practice, but keep in mind, we value your
  unique voice and perspective.

* **Limit AI Tools for Reviewing.** As with creating code, documentation, and
  other contributions, reviewers may use AI tools to assist in providing
  feedback, but not to wholly automate the review process. Particularly, AI
  should not make the final determination on whether a contribution is accepted
  or not. The same principle of ownership applies to review comment
  contributions as it does to code contributions.

[ai-slop]: https://simonwillison.net/2024/May/8/slop/

This policy extends beyond code contributions and includes, but is not limited
to, the following kinds of contributions:

- Code, usually in the form of a pull request
- RFCs or design proposals
- Issues or security vulnerabilities
- Comments and feedback on pull requests


## Extractive Changes

Sending patches, PRs, RFCs, comments, etc to LLVM, is not free -- it takes a
lot of maintainer time and energy to review those contributions! We see the act
of sending low-quality, un-self-reviewed contributions to the LLVM project as
"extractive." It is an attempt to extract work from the LLVM project community
in the form of review comments and mentorship, without the contributor putting
in comensurate effort to make their contribution worth reviewing.

Our **golden rule** is that a contribution should be worth more to the project
than the time it takes to review it. These ideas are captured by this quote
from the book [Working in Public][public] by Nadia Eghbal:

[public]: https://press.stripe.com/working-in-public

> \"When attention is being appropriated, producers need to weigh the costs and
> benefits of the transaction. To assess whether the appropriation of attention
> is net-positive, it's useful to distinguish between *extractive* and
> *non-extractive* contributions. Extractive contributions are those where the
> marginal cost of reviewing and merging that contribution is greater than the
> marginal benefit to the project's producers. In the case of a code
> contribution, it might be a pull request that's too complex or unwieldy to
> review, given the potential upside.\" \-- Nadia Eghbal

We encourage contributions that help sustain the project. We want the LLVM
project to be welcoming and open to aspiring compiler engineers who are willing
to invest time and effort to learn and grow, because growing our contributor
base and recruiting new maintainers helps sustain the project over the long
term. We therefore automatically post a greeting comment to pull requests from
new contributors and encourage maintainers to spend their time to help new
contributors learn.

## Handling Violations

If a maintainer judges that a contribution is *extractive* (i.e. it is
generated with tool-assistance or simply requires significant revision), they
should copy-paste the following response, add the `extractive` label if
applicable, and refrain from further engagement:

    This PR appears to be extractive, and requires additional justification for
    why it is valuable enough to the project for us to review it. Please see
    our developer policy on AI-generated contributions:
    http://llvm.org/docs/AIToolPolicy.html

Other reviewers should use the label prioritize their review time.

The best ways to make a change less extractive and more valuable are to reduce
its size or complexity or to increase its usefulness to the community. These
factors are impossible to weigh objectively, and our project policy leaves this
determination up to the maintainers of the project, i.e. those who are doing
the work of sustaining the project.

If a contributor responds but doesn't make their change meaningfully less
extractive, maintainers should escalate to the relevant moderation or admin
team for the space (GitHub, Discourse, Discord, etc) to lock the conversation.

## Copyright

Artificial intelligence systems raise many questions around copyright that have
yet to be answered. Our policy on AI tools is similar to our copyright policy:
Contributors are responsible for ensuring that they have the right to
contribute code under the terms of our license, typically meaning that either
they, their employer, or their collaborators hold the copyright. Using AI tools
to regenerate copyrighted material does not remove the copyright, and
contributors are responsible for ensuring that such material does not appear in
their contributions. Contributions found to violate this policy will be removed
just like any other offending contribution.

## Examples

Here are some examples of contributions that demonstrate how to apply
the principles of this policy:

- [This PR][alive-pr] contains a proof from Alive2, which is a strong signal of
  value and correctness.
- This [generated documentation][gsym-docs] was reviewed for correctness by a
  human before being posted.

[alive-pr]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/142869
[gsym-docs]: https://discourse.llvm.org/t/searching-for-gsym-documentation/85185/2

## References

Our policy was informed by experiences in other communities:

- [Fedora Council Policy Proposal: Policy on AI-Assisted Contributions (fetched
  2025-10-01)][fedora]: Some of the text above was copied from the (very good!) Fedora
  project policy proposal, which is licensed under the [Creative Commons
  Attribution 4.0 International License][cca]. This link serves as attribution.
- [Rust draft policy on burdensome PRs][rust-burdensome]
- [Seth Larson's post][security-slop]
  on slop security reports in the Python ecosystem
- The METR paper [Measuring the Impact of Early-2025 AI on Experienced
  Open-Source Developer Productivity][metr-paper].
- [QEMU bans use of AI content generators][qemu-ban]

[fedora]: https://communityblog.fedoraproject.org/council-policy-proposal-policy-on-ai-assisted-contributions/
[cca]: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
[rust-burdensome]: https://github.com/rust-lang/compiler-team/issues/893
[security-slop]: https://sethmlarson.dev/slop-security-reports
[metr-paper]: https://metr.org/blog/2025-07-10-early-2025-ai-experienced-os-dev-study/
[qemu-ban]: https://www.qemu.org/docs/master/devel/code-provenance.html#use-of-ai-content-generators
