llvm/docs/DTLTO.rst, before:

===================
DTLTO
===================
.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

Distributed ThinLTO (DTLTO)
===========================

Distributed ThinLTO (DTLTO) facilitates the distribution of backend ThinLTO
compilations via external distribution systems such as Incredibuild.

The existing method of distributing ThinLTO compilations via separate thin-link,
backend compilation, and link steps often requires significant changes to the
user's build process to adopt, as it requires using a build system which can
handle the dynamic dependencies specified by the index files, such as Bazel.

DTLTO eliminates this need by managing distribution internally within the LLD
linker during the traditional link step. This allows DTLTO to be used with any
build process that supports in-process ThinLTO.

Limitations
-----------

The current implementation of DTLTO has the following limitations:

- The ThinLTO cache is not supported.
- Only ELF and COFF platforms are supported.
- Archives with bitcode members are not supported.
- Only a very limited set of LTO configurations are currently supported, e.g.,
  support for basic block sections is not currently available.

Overview of Operation
---------------------

For each ThinLTO backend compilation job, LLD:

1. Generates the required summary index shard.
2. Records a list of input and output files.
3. Constructs a Clang command line to perform the ThinLTO backend compilation.

This information is supplied, via a JSON file, to a distributor program that
executes the backend compilations using a distribution system. Upon completion,
LLD integrates the compiled native object files into the link process.

The design keeps the details of distribution systems out of the LLVM source
code.

Distributors
------------

Distributors are programs responsible for:

1. Consuming the JSON backend compilations job description file.
2. Translating job descriptions into requests for the distribution system.
3. Blocking execution until all backend compilations are complete.

Distributors must return a non-zero exit code on failure. They can be
implemented as binaries or in scripting languages, such as Python. An example
script demonstrating basic local execution is available with the LLVM source
code.

How Distributors Are Invoked
----------------------------

Clang and LLD provide options to specify a distributor program for managing
backend compilations. Distributor options and backend compilation options, can
also be specified. Such options are transparently forwarded.

The backend compilations are currently performed by invoking Clang. For further
details, refer to:

- Clang documentation: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ThinLTO.html
- LLD documentation: https://lld.llvm.org/DTLTO.html

When invoked with a distributor, LLD generates a JSON file describing the
backend compilation jobs and executes the distributor passing it this file. The
JSON file provides the following information to the distributor:

- The **command line** to execute the backend compilations.
   - DTLTO constructs a Clang command line by translating some of the LTO
     configuration state into Clang options and forwarding options specified
     by the user.

- **Link output path**.
   - A string identifying the output to which this LTO invocation will 
     contribute. Distributors can use this to label build jobs for informational
     purposes.

- **Linker's version string**.
   - Distributors can use this to determine if the invoked remote optimisation
     tool is compatible.

- The list of **imports** required for each job.
   - The per-job list of bitcode files from which importing will occur. This is
     the same information that is emitted into import files for ThinLTO.

- The **input files** required for each job.
   - The per-job set of files required for backend compilation, such as bitcode
     files, summary index files, and profile data.

- The **output files** generated by each job.
   - The per-job files generated by the backend compilations, such as compiled
     object files and toolchain metrics.

Temporary Files
---------------

During its operation, DTLTO generates temporary files. Temporary files are
created in the same directory as the linker's output file and their filenames
include the stem of the bitcode module, or the output file that the LTO 
invocation is contributing to, to aid the user in identifying them:

- **JSON Job Description File**:
    - Format:  `dtlto.<UID>.dist-file.json`
    - Example: `dtlto.77380.dist-file.json` (for output file `dtlto.elf`).

- **Object Files From Backend Compilations**:
    - Format:  `<Module ID stem>.<Task>.<UID>.native.o`
    - Example: `my.1.77380.native.o` (for bitcode module `my.o`).

- **Summary Index Shard Files**:
    - Format:  `<Module ID stem>.<Task>.<UID>.native.o.thinlto.bc`
    - Example: `my.1.77380.native.o.thinlto.bc` (for bitcode module `my.o`).

Temporary files are removed, by default, after the backend compilations complete.

JSON Schema
-----------

Below is an example of a JSON job file for backend compilation of the module
`dtlto.o`:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "common": {
            "linker_output": "dtlto.elf",
            "linker_version": "LLD 20.0.0",
            "args": [
                "/usr/local/clang",
                "-O3", "-fprofile-sample-use=my.profdata",
                "-o", ["primary_output", 0],
                "-c", "-x", "ir", ["primary_input", 0],
                ["summary_index", "-fthinlto-index=", 0],
                "--target=x86_64-sie-ps5"
            ]
        },
        "jobs": [
            {
                "primary_input": ["dtlto.o"],
                "summary_index": ["dtlto.1.51232.native.o.thinlto.bc"],
                "primary_output": ["dtlto.1.51232.native.o"],
                "imports": [],
                "additional_inputs": ["my.profdata"]
            }
        ]
    }

Key Features of the Schema
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Input/Output Paths**: Paths are stored in per-file-type array fields. This
  allows files to be adjusted, if required, to meet the constraints of the
  underlying distribution system. For example, a system may only be able to read
  and write remote files to `C:\\sandbox`. The remote paths used can be adjusted
  by the distributor for such constraints. Once outputs are back on the local
  system, the distributor can rename them as required.


- **Command-Line Template**: Command-line options are stored in a common
  template to avoid duplication for each job. The template consists of an array
  of strings and arrays. The arrays are placeholders which reference per-job
  paths. This allows the remote optimisation tool to be changed without updating
  the distributors.

Command-Line Expansion Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create the backend compilation commands, the command-line template is
expanded for each job. Placeholders are expanded in the following way: The first
array element specifies the name of the array field to look in. The remaining
elements are converted to strings and concatenated. Integers are converted by
indexing into the specified array.

The example above generates the following backend compilation command for
`main.o`:

.. code-block:: console

    /usr/local/clang -O3 -fprofile-sample-use=my.profdata \
        -o dtlto.1.51232.native.o -c -x ir dtlto.o \
        -fthinlto-index=dtlto.1.51232.native.o.thinlto.bc --target=x86_64-sie-ps5

This expansion scheme allows the remote optimization tool to be changed without
updating the distributors. For example, if the "args" field in the above example
was replaced with:

.. code-block:: json

    "args": [
        "custom-codgen-tool",
        "-opt-level=2",
        "-profile-instrument-use-path=my.profdata",
        "-output", ["primary_output", 0],
        "-input", ["primary_input", 0],
        "-thinlto-index", ["summary_index", 0],
        "-triple", "x86_64-sie-ps5"
    ]

Then distributors can expand the command line without needing to be updated:

.. code-block:: console

    custom-codgen-tool -opt-level=2 -profile-instrument-use-path=my.profdata \
        -output dtlto.1.51232.native.o -input dtlto.o \
        -thinlto-index dtlto.1.51232.native.o.thinlto.bc -triple x86_64-sie-ps5

Constraints
-----------

- Matching versions of Clang and LLD should be used.
- The distributor used must support the JSON schema generated by the version of
  LLD in use.

Commit message:

Update documentation to match recent changes
- Remove mention of the, now removed, "Linker Version" stuff.
- Remote optimization tool -> remote compiler.

llvm/docs/DTLTO.rst, after:

===================
DTLTO
===================
.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

Distributed ThinLTO (DTLTO)
===========================

Distributed ThinLTO (DTLTO) facilitates the distribution of backend ThinLTO
compilations via external distribution systems such as Incredibuild.

The existing method of distributing ThinLTO compilations via separate thin-link,
backend compilation, and link steps often requires significant changes to the
user's build process to adopt, as it requires using a build system which can
handle the dynamic dependencies specified by the index files, such as Bazel.

DTLTO eliminates this need by managing distribution internally within the LLD
linker during the traditional link step. This allows DTLTO to be used with any
build process that supports in-process ThinLTO.

Limitations
-----------

The current implementation of DTLTO has the following limitations:

- The ThinLTO cache is not supported.
- Only ELF and COFF platforms are supported.
- Archives with bitcode members are not supported.
- Only a very limited set of LTO configurations are currently supported, e.g.,
  support for basic block sections is not currently available.

Overview of Operation
---------------------

For each ThinLTO backend compilation job, LLD:

1. Generates the required summary index shard.
2. Records a list of input and output files.
3. Constructs a Clang command line to perform the ThinLTO backend compilation.

This information is supplied, via a JSON file, to a distributor program that
executes the backend compilations using a distribution system. Upon completion,
LLD integrates the compiled native object files into the link process.

The design keeps the details of distribution systems out of the LLVM source
code.

Distributors
------------

Distributors are programs responsible for:

1. Consuming the JSON backend compilations job description file.
2. Translating job descriptions into requests for the distribution system.
3. Blocking execution until all backend compilations are complete.

Distributors must return a non-zero exit code on failure. They can be
implemented as binaries or in scripting languages, such as Python. An example
script demonstrating basic local execution is available with the LLVM source
code.

How Distributors Are Invoked
----------------------------

Clang and LLD provide options to specify a distributor program for managing
backend compilations. Distributor options and backend compilation options, can
also be specified. Such options are transparently forwarded.

The backend compilations are currently performed by invoking Clang. For further
details, refer to:

- Clang documentation: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ThinLTO.html
- LLD documentation: https://lld.llvm.org/DTLTO.html

When invoked with a distributor, LLD generates a JSON file describing the
backend compilation jobs and executes the distributor passing it this file. The
JSON file provides the following information to the distributor:

- The **command line** to execute the backend compilations.
   - DTLTO constructs a Clang command line by translating some of the LTO
     configuration state into Clang options and forwarding options specified
     by the user.

- **Link output path**.
   - A string identifying the output to which this LTO invocation will 
     contribute. Distributors can use this to label build jobs for informational
     purposes.

- The list of **imports** required for each job.
   - The per-job list of bitcode files from which importing will occur. This is
     the same information that is emitted into import files for ThinLTO.

- The **input files** required for each job.
   - The per-job set of files required for backend compilation, such as bitcode
     files, summary index files, and profile data.

- The **output files** generated by each job.
   - The per-job files generated by the backend compilations, such as compiled
     object files and toolchain metrics.

Temporary Files
---------------

During its operation, DTLTO generates temporary files. Temporary files are
created in the same directory as the linker's output file and their filenames
include the stem of the bitcode module, or the output file that the LTO 
invocation is contributing to, to aid the user in identifying them:

- **JSON Job Description File**:
    - Format:  `dtlto.<UID>.dist-file.json`
    - Example: `dtlto.77380.dist-file.json` (for output file `dtlto.elf`).

- **Object Files From Backend Compilations**:
    - Format:  `<Module ID stem>.<Task>.<UID>.native.o`
    - Example: `my.1.77380.native.o` (for bitcode module `my.o`).

- **Summary Index Shard Files**:
    - Format:  `<Module ID stem>.<Task>.<UID>.native.o.thinlto.bc`
    - Example: `my.1.77380.native.o.thinlto.bc` (for bitcode module `my.o`).

Temporary files are removed, by default, after the backend compilations complete.

JSON Schema
-----------

Below is an example of a JSON job file for backend compilation of the module
`dtlto.o`:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "common": {
            "linker_output": "dtlto.elf",
            "linker_version": "LLD 20.0.0",
            "args": [
                "/usr/local/clang",
                "-O3", "-fprofile-sample-use=my.profdata",
                "-o", ["primary_output", 0],
                "-c", "-x", "ir", ["primary_input", 0],
                ["summary_index", "-fthinlto-index=", 0],
                "--target=x86_64-sie-ps5"
            ]
        },
        "jobs": [
            {
                "primary_input": ["dtlto.o"],
                "summary_index": ["dtlto.1.51232.native.o.thinlto.bc"],
                "primary_output": ["dtlto.1.51232.native.o"],
                "imports": [],
                "additional_inputs": ["my.profdata"]
            }
        ]
    }

Key Features of the Schema
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Input/Output Paths**: Paths are stored in per-file-type array fields. This
  allows files to be adjusted, if required, to meet the constraints of the
  underlying distribution system. For example, a system may only be able to read
  and write remote files to `C:\\sandbox`. The remote paths used can be adjusted
  by the distributor for such constraints. Once outputs are back on the local
  system, the distributor can rename them as required.


- **Command-Line Template**: Command-line options are stored in a common
  template to avoid duplication for each job. The template consists of an array
  of strings and arrays. The arrays are placeholders which reference per-job
  paths. This allows the remote compiler and its arguments to be changed without
  updating the distributors.

Command-Line Expansion Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create the backend compilation commands, the command-line template is
expanded for each job. Placeholders are expanded in the following way: The first
array element specifies the name of the array field to look in. The remaining
elements are converted to strings and concatenated. Integers are converted by
indexing into the specified array.

The example above generates the following backend compilation command for
`main.o`:

.. code-block:: console

    /usr/local/clang -O3 -fprofile-sample-use=my.profdata \
        -o dtlto.1.51232.native.o -c -x ir dtlto.o \
        -fthinlto-index=dtlto.1.51232.native.o.thinlto.bc --target=x86_64-sie-ps5

This expansion scheme allows the remote compiler to be changed without updating
the distributors. For example, if the "args" field in the above example was
replaced with:

.. code-block:: json

    "args": [
        "custom-compiler",
        "-opt-level=2",
        "-profile-instrument-use-path=my.profdata",
        "-output", ["primary_output", 0],
        "-input", ["primary_input", 0],
        "-thinlto-index", ["summary_index", 0],
        "-triple", "x86_64-sie-ps5"
    ]

Then distributors can expand the command line without needing to be updated:

.. code-block:: console

    custom-compiler -opt-level=2 -profile-instrument-use-path=my.profdata \
        -output dtlto.1.51232.native.o -input dtlto.o \
        -thinlto-index dtlto.1.51232.native.o.thinlto.bc -triple x86_64-sie-ps5

Constraints
-----------

- Matching versions of Clang and LLD should be used.
- The distributor used must support the JSON schema generated by the version of
  LLD in use.
