llvm/docs/FatLTO.rst, before:

===================
FatLTO
===================
.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

Introduction
============

FatLTO objects are a special type of `fat object file
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fat_binary>`_ that contain LTO compatible IR in
addition to generated object code, instead of containing object code for
multiple target architectures. This allows users to defer the choice of whether
to use LTO or not to link-time, and has been a feature available in other
compilers, like `GCC
<https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/LTO-Overview.html>`_, for some time.

Under FatLTO the compiler can emit standard object files which contain both the
machine code in the ``.text`` section and LLVM bitcode in the ``.llvm.lto``
section.

Overview
========

Within LLVM, FatLTO is supported by choosing the ``FatLTODefaultPipeline``.
This pipeline will:

#) Clone the IR module.
#) Run the pre-link (Thin)LTO pipeline using the cloned module.
#) Embed the pre-link bitcode in a special ``.llvm.lto`` section.
#) Optimize the unmodified copy of the module using the normal compilation pipeline.
#) Emit the object file, including the new ``.llvm.lto`` section.

.. NOTE

   At the time of writing, we conservatively run independent pipelines to
   generate the bitcode section and the object code, which happen to be
   identical to those used outside of FatLTO. This results in  compiled
   artifacts that are identical to those produced by the default and (Thin)LTO
   pipelines. However, this is not a guarantee, and we reserve the right to
   change this at any time. Explicitly, users should not rely on the produced
   bitcode or object code to mach their non-LTO counterparts precisely. They
   will exhibit similar performance characteristics, but may not be bit-for-bit
   the same.

Internally, the ``.llvm.lto`` section is created by running the
``EmbedBitcodePass`` at the start of the ``PerModuleDefaultPipeline``. This
pass is responsible for cloning and optimizing the module with the appropriate
LTO pipeline and emitting the ``.llvm.lto`` section. Afterwards, the
``PerModuleDefaultPipeline`` runs normally and the compiler can emit the fat
object file.

Limitations
===========

Linkers
-------

Currently, using LTO with LLVM fat lto objects is supported by LLD and by the
GNU linkers via :doc:`GoldPlugin`. This may change in the future, but
extending support to other linkers isn't planned for now.

.. NOTE
   For standard linking the fat object files should be usable by any
   linker capable of using ELF objects, since the ``.llvm.lto`` section is
   marked ``SHF_EXCLUDE``.

Supported File Formats
----------------------

The current implementation only supports ELF files. At time of writing, it is
unclear if it will be useful to support other object file formats like ``COFF``
or ``Mach-O``.

Commit message:

[clang][llvm][fatlto] Avoid cloning modules in FatLTO
https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/70703 pointed out that
cloning LLVM modules could lead to miscompiles when using FatLTO.

This is due to an existing issue when cloning modules with labels
(see #55991 and #47769). Since this can lead to miscompilation,
we can avoid cloning the LLVM modules, which was desirable anyway.

This patch modifies the EmbedBitcodePass to no longer clone the module
or run an input pipeline over it. Further, it make FatLTO always perform
UnifiedLTO, so we can still defer the Thin/Full LTO decision to
link-time. Lastly, it removes dead/obsolete code related to now defunct
options that do not work with the EmbedBitcodePass implementation any
longer.

llvm/docs/FatLTO.rst, after:

===================
FatLTO
===================
.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

Introduction
============

FatLTO objects are a special type of `fat object file
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fat_binary>`_ that contain LTO compatible IR in
addition to generated object code, instead of containing object code for
multiple target architectures. This allows users to defer the choice of whether
to use LTO or not to link-time, and has been a feature available in other
compilers, like `GCC
<https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/LTO-Overview.html>`_, for some time.

Under FatLTO the compiler can emit standard object files which contain both the
machine code in the ``.text`` section and LLVM bitcode in the ``.llvm.lto``
section.

Overview
========

Within LLVM, FatLTO is supported by choosing the ``FatLTODefaultPipeline``.
This pipeline will:

#) Run the pre-link UnifiedLTO pipeline on the current module.
#) Embed the pre-link bitcode in a special ``.llvm.lto`` section.
#) Finish optimizing the module using the post-link ThinLTO pipeline.
#) Emit the object file, including the new ``.llvm.lto`` section.

.. NOTE

   Previously, we conservatively ran independent pipelines on separate copies
   of the LLVM module to generate the bitcode section and the object code,
   which happen to be identical to those used outside of FatLTO. While that
   resulted in  compiled artifacts that were identical to those produced by the
   default and (Thin)LTO pipelines, module cloning led to some cases of
   miscompilation, and we have moved away from trying to keep bitcode
   generation and optimization completely disjoint.

   Bit-for-bit compatibility is not (and never was) a guarantee, and we reserve
   the right to change this at any time. Explicitly, users should not rely on
   the produced bitcode or object code to mach their non-LTO counterparts
   precisely. They will exhibit similar performance characteristics, but may
   not be bit-for-bit the same.

Internally, the ``.llvm.lto`` section is created by running the
``EmbedBitcodePass`` after the ``ThinLTOPreLinkDefaultPipeline``. This pass is
responsible for emitting the ``.llvm.lto`` section. Afterwards, the
``ThinLTODefaultPipeline`` runs and the compiler can emit the fat object file.

Limitations
===========

Linkers
-------

Currently, using LTO with LLVM fat lto objects is supported by LLD and by the
GNU linkers via :doc:`GoldPlugin`. This may change in the future, but
extending support to other linkers isn't planned for now.

.. NOTE
   For standard linking the fat object files should be usable by any
   linker capable of using ELF objects, since the ``.llvm.lto`` section is
   marked ``SHF_EXCLUDE``.

Supported File Formats
----------------------

The current implementation only supports ELF files. At time of writing, it is
unclear if it will be useful to support other object file formats like ``COFF``
or ``Mach-O``.
