======================
LLVM 3.5 Release Notes
======================

.. contents::
    :local:


Introduction
============

This document contains the release notes for the LLVM Compiler Infrastructure,
release 3.5.  Here we describe the status of LLVM, including major improvements
from the previous release, improvements in various subprojects of LLVM, and
some of the current users of the code.  All LLVM releases may be downloaded
from the `LLVM releases web site <http://llvm.org/releases/>`_.

For more information about LLVM, including information about the latest
release, please check out the `main LLVM web site <http://llvm.org/>`_.  If you
have questions or comments, the `LLVM Developer's Mailing List
<http://lists.cs.uiuc.edu/mailman/listinfo/llvmdev>`_ is a good place to send
them.

Non-comprehensive list of changes in this release
=================================================

Changes to the MIPS Target
--------------------------

* Corrected inline assembly to use the same assembler options as GCC for the
  duration of the inline assembly block. Particularly, ``.set reorder``,
  ``.set nomacro``, and ``.set noat`` are now correct.

* Added ability to specify $gp as a named register global variable.

* Added support for ``.set push`` and ``.set pop``.

* Fixed a code generation bug in the comparison operators for MIPS32r6/MIPS64r6
  where the compiler would use ``<`` when it should have used ``<=``.

* Fixed various assertions when using 128-bit integers on 64-bit targets.

* Fixed invalid use of an odd-numbered single-precision floating point register
  when using ``-mno-odd-spreg`` with ``-msa``.

Non-comprehensive list of changes in 3.5.1
==========================================

Changes to the MIPS Target
--------------------------

* A large number of bugs have been fixed for big-endian Mips targets using the
  N32 and N64 ABI's. Please note that some of these bugs will still affect
  LLVM-IR generated by LLVM 3.5 since correct code generation depends on
  appropriate usage of the ``inreg``, ``signext``, and ``zeroext`` attributes
  on all function arguments and returns.

* The registers used to return a structure containing a single 128-bit floating
  point member on the N32/N64 ABI's have been changed from those specified by
  the ABI documentation to match those used by GCC. The documentation specifies
  that ``$f0`` and ``$f2`` should be used but GCC has used ``$f0`` and ``$f1``
  for many years.

* Returning a zero-byte struct no longer causes incorrect code generation when
  using the O32 ABI.

* Passing structures of less than 32-bits using the O32 ABI on a big-endian
  target has been fixed.

* The exception personality has been changed for 64-bit Mips targets to
  eliminate warnings about relocations in a read-only section.

* Incorrect usage of odd-numbered single-precision floating point registers
  has been fixed when the fastcc calling convention is used with 64-bit FPU's
  and -mno-odd-spreg.

* For inline assembly, the 'z' print-modifier print modifier can now be used on
  non-immediate values.

* Attempting to disassemble l[wd]c[23], s[wd]c[23], cache, and pref no longer
  triggers an assertion.

Non-comprehensive list of changes in 3.5
========================================

* All backends have been changed to use the MC asm printer and support for the
  non MC one has been removed.

* Clang can now successfully self-host itself on Linux/Sparc64 and on
  FreeBSD/Sparc64.

* LLVM now assumes the assembler supports ``.loc`` for generating debug line
  numbers. The old support for printing the debug line info directly was only
  used by ``llc`` and has been removed.

* All inline assembly is parsed by the integrated assembler when it is enabled.
  Previously this was only the case for object-file output. It is now the case
  for assembly output as well. The integrated assembler can be disabled with
  the ``-no-integrated-as`` option.

* llvm-ar now handles IR files like regular object files. In particular, a
  regular symbol table is created for symbols defined in IR files, including
  those in file scope inline assembly.

* LLVM now always uses cfi directives for producing most stack
  unwinding information.

* The prefix for loop vectorizer hint metadata has been changed from
  ``llvm.vectorizer`` to ``llvm.loop.vectorize``.  In addition,
  ``llvm.vectorizer.unroll`` metadata has been renamed
  ``llvm.loop.interleave.count``.

* Some backends previously implemented Atomic NAND(x,y) as ``x & ~y``. Now 
  all backends implement it as ``~(x & y)``, matching the semantics of GCC 4.4
  and later.

.. NOTE
   For small 1-3 sentence descriptions, just add an entry at the end of
   this list. If your description won't fit comfortably in one bullet
   point (e.g. maybe you would like to give an example of the
   functionality, or simply have a lot to talk about), see the `NOTE` below
   for adding a new subsection.

* ... next change ...

.. NOTE
   If you would like to document a larger change, then you can add a
   subsection about it right here. You can copy the following boilerplate
   and un-indent it (the indentation causes it to be inside this comment).

   Special New Feature
   -------------------

   Makes programs 10x faster by doing Special New Thing.

Changes to the ARM Backend
--------------------------

Since release 3.3, a lot of new features have been included in the ARM
back-end but weren't production ready (ie. well tested) on release 3.4.
Just after the 3.4 release, we started heavily testing two major parts
of the back-end: the integrated assembler (IAS) and the ARM exception
handling (EHABI), and now they are enabled by default on LLVM/Clang.

The IAS received a lot of GNU extensions and directives, as well as some
specific pre-UAL instructions. Not all remaining directives will be
implemented, as we made judgement calls on the need versus the complexity,
and have chosen simplicity and future compatibility where hard decisions
had to be made. The major difference is, as stated above, the IAS validates
all inline ASM, not just for object emission, and that cause trouble with
some uses of inline ASM as pre-processor magic.

So, while the IAS is good enough to compile large projects (including most
of the Linux kernel), there are a few things that we can't (and probably
won't) do. For those cases, please use ``-fno-integrated-as`` in Clang.

Exception handling is another big change. After extensive testing and
changes to cooperate with Dwarf unwinding, EHABI is enabled by default.
The options ``-arm-enable-ehabi`` and ``-arm-enable-ehabi-descriptors``,
which were used to enable EHABI in the previous releases, are removed now.

This means all ARM code will emit EH unwind tables, or CFI unwinding (for
debug/profiling), or both. To avoid run-time inconsistencies, C code will
also emit EH tables (in case they interoperate with C++ code), as is the
case for other architectures (ex. x86_64).

Changes to the MIPS Target
--------------------------

There has been a large amount of improvements to the MIPS target which can be
broken down into subtarget, ABI, and Integrated Assembler changes.

Subtargets
^^^^^^^^^^

Added support for Release 6 of the MIPS32 and MIPS64 architecture (MIPS32r6
and MIPS64r6). Release 6 makes a number of significant changes to the MIPS32
and MIPS64 architectures. For example, FPU registers are always 64-bits wide,
FPU NaN values conform to IEEE 754 (2008), and the unaligned memory instructions
(such as lwl and lwr) have been replaced with a requirement for ordinary memory
operations to support unaligned operations. Full details of MIPS32 and MIPS64
Release 6 can be found on the `MIPS64 Architecture page at Imagination
Technologies <http://www.imgtec.com/mips/architectures/mips64.asp>`_.

This release also adds experimental support for MIPS-IV, cnMIPS, and Cavium
Octeon CPU's.

Support for the MIPS SIMD Architecture (MSA) has been improved to support MSA
on MIPS64.

Support for IEEE 754 (2008) NaN values has been added.

ABI and ABI extensions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There has also been considerable ABI work since the 3.4 release. This release
adds support for the N32 ABI, the O32-FPXX ABI Extension, the O32-FP64 ABI
Extension, and the O32-FP64A ABI Extension.

The N32 ABI is an existing ABI that has now been implemented in LLVM. It is a
64-bit ABI that is similar to N64 but retains 32-bit pointers. N64 remains the
default 64-bit ABI in LLVM. This differs from GCC where N32 is the default
64-bit ABI.

The O32-FPXX ABI Extension is 100% compatible with the O32-ABI and the O32-FP64
ABI Extension and may be linked with either but may not be linked with both of
these simultaneously. It extends the O32 ABI to allow the same code to execute
without modification on processors with 32-bit FPU registers as well as 64-bit
FPU registers. The O32-FPXX ABI Extension is enabled by default for the O32 ABI
on mips*-img-linux-gnu and mips*-mti-linux-gnu triples and is selected with
-mfpxx. It is expected that future releases of LLVM will enable the FPXX
Extension for O32 on all triples.

The O32-FP64 ABI Extension is an extension to the O32 ABI to fully exploit FPU's
with 64-bit registers and is enabled with -mfp64. This replaces an undocumented
and unsupported O32 extension which was previously enabled with -mfp64. It is
100% compatible with the O32-FPXX ABI Extension.

The O32-FP64A ABI Extension is a restricted form of the O32-FP64 ABI Extension
which allows interlinking with unmodified binaries that use the base O32 ABI.

Integrated Assembler
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The MIPS Integrated Assembler has undergone a substantial overhaul including a
rewrite of the assembly parser. It's not ready for general use in this release
but adventurous users may wish to enable it using ``-fintegrated-as``.

In this release, the integrated assembler supports the majority of MIPS-I,
MIPS-II, MIPS-III, MIPS-IV, MIPS-V, MIPS32, MIPS32r2, MIPS32r6, MIPS64,
MIPS64r2, and MIPS64r6 as well as some of the Application Specific Extensions
such as MSA. It also supports several of the MIPS specific assembler directives
such as ``.set``, ``.module``, ``.cpload``, etc.

Changes to the AArch64 Target
-----------------------------

The AArch64 target in LLVM 3.5 is based on substantially different code to the
one in LLVM 3.4, having been created as the result of merging code released by
Apple for targetting iOS with the previously existing backend.

We hope the result is a general improvement in the project. Particularly notable
changes are:

* We should produce faster code, having combined optimisations and ideas from
  both sources in the final backend.
* We have a FastISel for AArch64, which should compile time for debug builds (at
  -O0).
* We can now target iOS platforms (using the triple ``arm64-apple-ios7.0``).

Background
^^^^^^^^^^

During the 3.5 release cycle, Apple released the source used to generate 64-bit
ARM programs on iOS platforms. This took the form of a separate backend that had
been developed in parallel to, and largely isolation from, the existing
code.

We decided that maintaining the two backends indefinitely was not an option,
since their features almost entirely overlapped. However, the implementation
details in both were different enough that any merge had to firmly start with
one backend as the core and cherry-pick the best features and optimisations from
the other.

After discussion, we decided to start with the Apple backend (called ARM64 at
the time) since it was older, more thoroughly tested in production use, and had
fewer idiosyncracies in the implementation details.

Many people from across the community worked throughout April and May to ensure
that this merge destination had all the features we wanted, from both
sources. In many cases we could simply copy code across; others needed heavy
modification for the new host; in the most worthwhile, we looked at both
implementations and combined the best features of each in an entirely new way.

We had also decided that the name of the combined backend should be AArch64,
following ARM's official documentation. So, at the end of May the old
AArch64 directory was removed, and ARM64 renamed into its place.

Changes to the PowerPC Target
-----------------------------

The PowerPC 64-bit Little Endian subtarget (powerpc64le-unknown-linux-gnu) is
now fully supported.  This includes support for the Altivec instruction set.

The Power Architecture 64-Bit ELFv2 ABI Specification is now supported, and
is the default ABI for Little Endian.  The ELFv1 ABI remains the default ABI
for Big Endian.  Currently, it is not possible to override these defaults.
That capability will be available (albeit not recommended) in a future release.

Links to the ELFv2 ABI specification and to the Power ISA Version 2.07
specification may be found `here <https://www-03.ibm.com/technologyconnect/tgcm/TGCMServlet.wss?alias=OpenPOWER&linkid=1n0000>`_ (free registration required).
Efforts are underway to move this to a location that doesn't require
registration, but the planned site isn't ready yet.

Experimental support for the VSX instruction set introduced with ISA 2.06
is now available using the ``-mvsx`` switch.  Work remains on this, so it
is not recommended for production use.  VSX is disabled for Little Endian
regardless of this switch setting.

Load/store cost estimates have been improved.

Constant hoisting has been enabled.

Global named register support has been enabled.

Initial support for PIC code has been added for the 32-bit ELF subtarget.
Further support will be available in a future release.


Changes to CMake build system
-----------------------------

* Building and installing LLVM, Clang and lld sphinx documentation can now be
  done in CMake builds. If ``LLVM_ENABLE_SPHINX`` is enabled the
  "``docs-<project>-html``" and "``docs-<project>-man``" targets (e.g.
  ``docs-llvm-html``) become available which can be invoked directly (e.g.
  ``make docs-llvm-html``) to build only the relevant sphinx documentation. If
  ``LLVM_BUILD_DOCS`` is enabled then the sphinx documentation will also be
  built as part of the normal build. Enabling this variable also means that if
  the ``install`` target is invoked then the built documentation will be
  installed.  See :ref:`LLVM-specific variables`.

* Both the Autoconf/Makefile and CMake build systems now generate
  ``LLVMConfig.cmake`` (and other files) to export installed libraries. This
  means that projects using CMake to build against LLVM libraries can now build
  against an installed LLVM built by the Autoconf/Makefile system. See
  :ref:`Embedding LLVM in your project` for details.

* Use of ``llvm_map_components_to_libraries()`` by external projects is
  deprecated and the new ``llvm_map_components_to_libnames()`` should be used
  instead.

External Open Source Projects Using LLVM 3.5
============================================

An exciting aspect of LLVM is that it is used as an enabling technology for
a lot of other language and tools projects. This section lists some of the
projects that have already been updated to work with LLVM 3.5.

LDC - the LLVM-based D compiler
-------------------------------

`D <http://dlang.org>`_ is a language with C-like syntax and static typing. It
pragmatically combines efficiency, control, and modeling power, with safety and
programmer productivity. D supports powerful concepts like Compile-Time Function
Execution (CTFE) and Template Meta-Programming, provides an innovative approach
to concurrency and offers many classical paradigms.

`LDC <http://wiki.dlang.org/LDC>`_ uses the frontend from the reference compiler
combined with LLVM as backend to produce efficient native code. LDC targets
x86/x86_64 systems like Linux, OS X, FreeBSD and Windows and also Linux/PPC64.
Ports to other architectures like ARM, AArch64 and MIPS64 are underway.

Portable Computing Language (pocl)
----------------------------------

In addition to producing an easily portable open source OpenCL
implementation, another major goal of `pocl <http://portablecl.org/>`_
is improving performance portability of OpenCL programs with
compiler optimizations, reducing the need for target-dependent manual
optimizations. An important part of pocl is a set of LLVM passes used to
statically parallelize multiple work-items with the kernel compiler, even in
the presence of work-group barriers. This enables static parallelization of
the fine-grained static concurrency in the work groups in multiple ways. 

TTA-based Co-design Environment (TCE)
-------------------------------------

`TCE <http://tce.cs.tut.fi/>`_ is a toolset for designing new
exposed datapath processors based on the Transport triggered architecture (TTA). 
The toolset provides a complete co-design flow from C/C++
programs down to synthesizable VHDL/Verilog and parallel program binaries.
Processor customization points include the register files, function units,
supported operations, and the interconnection network.

TCE uses Clang and LLVM for C/C++/OpenCL C language support, target independent 
optimizations and also for parts of code generation. It generates
new LLVM-based code generators "on the fly" for the designed processors and
loads them in to the compiler backend as runtime libraries to avoid
per-target recompilation of larger parts of the compiler chain. 

ISPC
----

`ISPC <http://ispc.github.io/>`_ is a C-based language based on the SPMD
(single program, multiple data) programming model that generates efficient
SIMD code for modern processors without the need for complex analysis and
autovectorization. The language exploits the concept of “varying” data types,
which ensure vector-friendly data layout, explicit vectorization and compact
representation of the program. The project uses the LLVM infrastructure for
optimization and code generation.

Likely
------

`Likely <http://www.liblikely.org>`_ is an embeddable just-in-time Lisp for
image recognition and heterogenous architectures. Algorithms are just-in-time
compiled using LLVM’s MCJIT infrastructure to execute on single or
multi-threaded CPUs and potentially OpenCL SPIR or CUDA enabled GPUs. Likely
exploits the observation that while image processing and statistical learning
kernels must be written generically to handle any matrix datatype, at runtime
they tend to be executed repeatedly on the same type. Likely also seeks to
explore new optimizations for statistical learning algorithms by moving them
from an offline model generation step to a compile-time simplification of a
function (the learning algorithm) with constant arguments (the training set).


Additional Information
======================

A wide variety of additional information is available on the `LLVM web page
<http://llvm.org/>`_, in particular in the `documentation
<http://llvm.org/docs/>`_ section.  The web page also contains versions of the
API documentation which is up-to-date with the Subversion version of the source
code.  You can access versions of these documents specific to this release by
going into the ``llvm/docs/`` directory in the LLVM tree.

If you have any questions or comments about LLVM, please feel free to contact
us via the `mailing lists <http://llvm.org/docs/#maillist>`_.

