llvm/docs/CommandGuide/llc.rst, before:

llc - LLVM static compiler
==========================

.. program:: llc

SYNOPSIS
--------

:program:`llc` [*options*] [*filename*]

DESCRIPTION
-----------

The :program:`llc` command compiles LLVM source inputs into assembly language
for a specified architecture.  The assembly language output can then be passed
through a native assembler and linker to generate a native executable.

The choice of architecture for the output assembly code is automatically
determined from the input file, unless the :option:`-march` option is used to
override the default.

OPTIONS
-------

If ``filename`` is "``-``" or omitted, :program:`llc` reads from standard input.
Otherwise, it will read from ``filename``.  Inputs can be in either the LLVM
assembly language format (``.ll``) or the LLVM bitcode format (``.bc``).

If the :option:`-o` option is omitted, then :program:`llc` will send its output
to standard output if the input is from standard input.  If the :option:`-o`
option specifies "``-``", then the output will also be sent to standard output.

If no :option:`-o` option is specified and an input file other than "``-``" is
specified, then :program:`llc` creates the output filename by taking the input
filename, removing any existing ``.bc`` extension, and adding a ``.s`` suffix.

Other :program:`llc` options are described below.

End-user Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. option:: -help

 Print a summary of command line options.

.. option:: -M

 Pass target-specific InstPrinter options.
 Refer to the ``-M`` option of :manpage:`llvm-objdump(1)`.

.. option:: -o <filename>

 Use ``<filename>`` as the output filename. See the summary above for more
 details.

.. option:: -O=uint

 Generate code at different optimization levels.  These correspond to the
 ``-O0``, ``-O1``, ``-O2``, and ``-O3`` optimization levels used by
 :program:`clang`.

.. option:: -mtriple=<target triple>

 Override the target triple specified in the input file with the specified
 string.

.. option:: -march=<arch>

 Specify the architecture for which to generate assembly, overriding the target
 encoded in the input file.  See the output of ``llc -help`` for a list of
 valid architectures.  By default this is inferred from the target triple or
 autodetected to the current architecture.

.. option:: -mcpu=<cpuname>

 Specify a specific chip in the current architecture to generate code for.
 By default this is inferred from the target triple and autodetected to
 the current architecture.  For a list of available CPUs, use:

 .. code-block:: none

   llvm-as < /dev/null | llc -march=xyz -mcpu=help

.. option:: -filetype=<output file type>

 Specify what kind of output ``llc`` should generated.  Options are: ``asm``
 for textual assembly ( ``'.s'``), ``obj`` for native object files (``'.o'``)
 and ``null`` for not emitting anything (for performance testing).

 Note that not all targets support all options.

.. option:: -mattr=a1,+a2,-a3,...

 Override or control specific attributes of the target, such as whether SIMD
 operations are enabled or not.  The default set of attributes is set by the
 current CPU.  For a list of available attributes, use:

 .. code-block:: none

   llvm-as < /dev/null | llc -march=xyz -mattr=help

.. option:: --frame-pointer

 Specify effect of frame pointer elimination optimization (all,non-leaf,none).

.. option:: --disable-excess-fp-precision

 Disable optimizations that may produce excess precision for floating point.
 Note that this option can dramatically slow down code on some systems
 (e.g. X86).

.. option:: --enable-no-infs-fp-math

 Enable optimizations that assume no Inf values.

.. option:: --enable-no-nans-fp-math

 Enable optimizations that assume no NAN values.

.. option:: --enable-no-signed-zeros-fp-math

 Enable FP math optimizations that assume the sign of 0 is insignificant.

.. option:: --enable-no-trapping-fp-math

 Enable setting the FP exceptions build attribute not to use exceptions.

.. option:: --stats

 Print statistics recorded by code-generation passes.

.. option:: --save-stats, --save-stats=cwd, --save-stats=obj

 Save LLVM statistics to a file in the current directory
 (:option:`--save-stats`/"--save-stats=cwd") or the directory
 of the output file ("--save-stats=obj") in JSON format.

.. option:: --time-passes

 Record the amount of time needed for each pass and print a report to standard
 error.

.. option:: -meabi=[default|gnu|4|5]

 Specify which EABI version should conform to.  Valid EABI versions are *gnu*,
 *4* and *5*.  Default value (*default*) depends on the triple.

.. option:: -stack-size-section

 Emit the .stack_sizes section which contains stack size metadata. The section
 contains an array of pairs of function symbol values (pointer size) and stack
 sizes (unsigned LEB128). The stack size values only include the space allocated
 in the function prologue. Functions with dynamic stack allocations are not
 included.

.. option:: -remarks-section

 Emit the __remarks (MachO) section which contains metadata about remark
 diagnostics.

Tuning/Configuration Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. option:: --print-after-isel

 Print generated machine code after instruction selection (useful for debugging).

.. option:: --regalloc=<allocator>

 Specify the register allocator to use.
 Valid register allocators are:

 *basic*

  Basic register allocator.

 *fast*

  Fast register allocator. It is the default for unoptimized code.

 *greedy*

  Greedy register allocator. It is the default for optimized code.

 *pbqp*

  Register allocator based on 'Partitioned Boolean Quadratic Programming'.

.. option:: --spiller=<spiller>

 Specify the spiller to use for register allocators that support it.  Currently
 this option is used only by the linear scan register allocator.  The default
 ``spiller`` is *local*.  Valid spillers are:

 *simple*

  Simple spiller

 *local*

  Local spiller

Intel IA-32-specific Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. option:: --x86-asm-syntax=[att|intel]

 Specify whether to emit assembly code in AT&T syntax (the default) or Intel
 syntax.

EXIT STATUS
-----------

If :program:`llc` succeeds, it will exit with 0.  Otherwise, if an error
occurs, it will exit with a non-zero value.

SEE ALSO
--------

:manpage:`lli(1)`

Commit message:

tools: Restore PluginLoader to llc (#182455)
This half reverts commit 6fdbcf68ba214725444103ff99668d78240562ea.

This is actually tested.

llvm/docs/CommandGuide/llc.rst, after:

llc - LLVM static compiler
==========================

.. program:: llc

SYNOPSIS
--------

:program:`llc` [*options*] [*filename*]

DESCRIPTION
-----------

The :program:`llc` command compiles LLVM source inputs into assembly language
for a specified architecture.  The assembly language output can then be passed
through a native assembler and linker to generate a native executable.

The choice of architecture for the output assembly code is automatically
determined from the input file, unless the :option:`-march` option is used to
override the default.

OPTIONS
-------

If ``filename`` is "``-``" or omitted, :program:`llc` reads from standard input.
Otherwise, it will read from ``filename``.  Inputs can be in either the LLVM
assembly language format (``.ll``) or the LLVM bitcode format (``.bc``).

If the :option:`-o` option is omitted, then :program:`llc` will send its output
to standard output if the input is from standard input.  If the :option:`-o`
option specifies "``-``", then the output will also be sent to standard output.

If no :option:`-o` option is specified and an input file other than "``-``" is
specified, then :program:`llc` creates the output filename by taking the input
filename, removing any existing ``.bc`` extension, and adding a ``.s`` suffix.

Other :program:`llc` options are described below.

End-user Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. option:: -help

 Print a summary of command line options.

.. option:: -M

 Pass target-specific InstPrinter options.
 Refer to the ``-M`` option of :manpage:`llvm-objdump(1)`.

.. option:: -o <filename>

 Use ``<filename>`` as the output filename. See the summary above for more
 details.

.. option:: -O=uint

 Generate code at different optimization levels.  These correspond to the
 ``-O0``, ``-O1``, ``-O2``, and ``-O3`` optimization levels used by
 :program:`clang`.

.. option:: -mtriple=<target triple>

 Override the target triple specified in the input file with the specified
 string.

.. option:: -march=<arch>

 Specify the architecture for which to generate assembly, overriding the target
 encoded in the input file.  See the output of ``llc -help`` for a list of
 valid architectures.  By default this is inferred from the target triple or
 autodetected to the current architecture.

.. option:: -mcpu=<cpuname>

 Specify a specific chip in the current architecture to generate code for.
 By default this is inferred from the target triple and autodetected to
 the current architecture.  For a list of available CPUs, use:

 .. code-block:: none

   llvm-as < /dev/null | llc -march=xyz -mcpu=help

.. option:: -filetype=<output file type>

 Specify what kind of output ``llc`` should generated.  Options are: ``asm``
 for textual assembly ( ``'.s'``), ``obj`` for native object files (``'.o'``)
 and ``null`` for not emitting anything (for performance testing).

 Note that not all targets support all options.

.. option:: -mattr=a1,+a2,-a3,...

 Override or control specific attributes of the target, such as whether SIMD
 operations are enabled or not.  The default set of attributes is set by the
 current CPU.  For a list of available attributes, use:

 .. code-block:: none

   llvm-as < /dev/null | llc -march=xyz -mattr=help

.. option:: --frame-pointer

 Specify effect of frame pointer elimination optimization (all,non-leaf,none).

.. option:: --disable-excess-fp-precision

 Disable optimizations that may produce excess precision for floating point.
 Note that this option can dramatically slow down code on some systems
 (e.g. X86).

.. option:: --enable-no-infs-fp-math

 Enable optimizations that assume no Inf values.

.. option:: --enable-no-nans-fp-math

 Enable optimizations that assume no NAN values.

.. option:: --enable-no-signed-zeros-fp-math

 Enable FP math optimizations that assume the sign of 0 is insignificant.

.. option:: --enable-no-trapping-fp-math

 Enable setting the FP exceptions build attribute not to use exceptions.

.. option:: --stats

 Print statistics recorded by code-generation passes.

.. option:: --save-stats, --save-stats=cwd, --save-stats=obj

 Save LLVM statistics to a file in the current directory
 (:option:`--save-stats`/"--save-stats=cwd") or the directory
 of the output file ("--save-stats=obj") in JSON format.

.. option:: --time-passes

 Record the amount of time needed for each pass and print a report to standard
 error.

.. option:: --load=<dso_path>

 Dynamically load ``dso_path`` (a path to a dynamically shared object) that
 implements an LLVM target.  This will permit the target name to be used with
 the :option:`-march` option so that code can be generated for that target.

.. option:: -meabi=[default|gnu|4|5]

 Specify which EABI version should conform to.  Valid EABI versions are *gnu*,
 *4* and *5*.  Default value (*default*) depends on the triple.

.. option:: -stack-size-section

 Emit the .stack_sizes section which contains stack size metadata. The section
 contains an array of pairs of function symbol values (pointer size) and stack
 sizes (unsigned LEB128). The stack size values only include the space allocated
 in the function prologue. Functions with dynamic stack allocations are not
 included.

.. option:: -remarks-section

 Emit the __remarks (MachO) section which contains metadata about remark
 diagnostics.

Tuning/Configuration Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. option:: --print-after-isel

 Print generated machine code after instruction selection (useful for debugging).

.. option:: --regalloc=<allocator>

 Specify the register allocator to use.
 Valid register allocators are:

 *basic*

  Basic register allocator.

 *fast*

  Fast register allocator. It is the default for unoptimized code.

 *greedy*

  Greedy register allocator. It is the default for optimized code.

 *pbqp*

  Register allocator based on 'Partitioned Boolean Quadratic Programming'.

.. option:: --spiller=<spiller>

 Specify the spiller to use for register allocators that support it.  Currently
 this option is used only by the linear scan register allocator.  The default
 ``spiller`` is *local*.  Valid spillers are:

 *simple*

  Simple spiller

 *local*

  Local spiller

Intel IA-32-specific Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. option:: --x86-asm-syntax=[att|intel]

 Specify whether to emit assembly code in AT&T syntax (the default) or Intel
 syntax.

EXIT STATUS
-----------

If :program:`llc` succeeds, it will exit with 0.  Otherwise, if an error
occurs, it will exit with a non-zero value.

SEE ALSO
--------

:manpage:`lli(1)`
