clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/misc/const-correctness.rst, before:

.. title:: clang-tidy - misc-const-correctness

misc-const-correctness
======================

This check implements detection of local variables which could be declared as
``const`` but are not. Declaring variables as ``const`` is required or
recommended by many coding guidelines, such as:
`ES.25 <https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#es25-declare-an-object-const-or-constexpr-unless-you-want-to-modify-its-value-later-on>`_
from the C++ Core Guidelines.

Please note that this check's analysis is type-based only. Variables that are
not modified but used to create a non-const handle that might escape the scope
are not diagnosed as potential ``const``.

.. code-block:: c++

  // Declare a variable, which is not ``const`` ...
  int i = 42;
  // but use it as read-only. This means that `i` can be declared ``const``.
  int result = i * i;       // Before transformation
  int const result = i * i; // After transformation

The check can analyze values, pointers and references and pointees:

.. code-block:: c++

  // Normal values like built-ins or objects.
  int potential_const_int = 42;       // Before transformation
  int const potential_const_int = 42; // After transformation
  int copy_of_value = potential_const_int;

  MyClass could_be_const;       // Before transformation
  MyClass const could_be_const; // After transformation
  could_be_const.const_qualified_method();

  // References can be declared const as well.
  int &reference_value = potential_const_int;       // Before transformation
  int const& reference_value = potential_const_int; // After transformation
  int another_copy = reference_value;

  // The similar semantics of pointers are analyzed.
  int *pointer_variable = &potential_const_int; // Before transformation
  int const*const pointer_variable = &potential_const_int; // After transformation, both pointer itself and pointee are supported.
  int last_copy = *pointer_variable;

The automatic code transformation is only applied to variables that are
declared in single declarations. You may want to prepare your code base with
:doc:`readability-isolate-declaration <../readability/isolate-declaration>` first.

Note that there is the check
:doc:`cppcoreguidelines-avoid-non-const-global-variables <../cppcoreguidelines/avoid-non-const-global-variables>`
to enforce ``const`` correctness on all globals.


Limitations
-----------

The check does not run on `C` code.

The check will not analyze templated variables or variables that are
instantiation dependent. Different instantiations can result in
different ``const`` correctness properties and in general it is not
possible to find all instantiations of a template. The template might
be used differently in an independent translation unit.

Options
-------

.. option:: AnalyzeValues

  Enable or disable the analysis of ordinary value variables, like
  ``int i = 42;``. Default is `true`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    // Warning
    int i = 42;
    // No warning
    int const i = 42;

    // Warning
    int a[] = {42, 42, 42};
    // No warning
    int const a[] = {42, 42, 42};

.. option:: AnalyzeReferences

  Enable or disable the analysis of reference variables, like
  ``int &ref = i;``. Default is `true`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    int i = 42;
    // Warning
    int& ref = i;
    // No warning
    int const& ref = i;

.. option:: AnalyzePointers

  Enable or disable the analysis of pointers variables, like
  ``int *ptr = &i;``. For specific checks, see
  :option:`WarnPointersAsValues` and :option:`WarnPointersAsPointers`.
  Default is `true`.

.. option:: WarnPointersAsValues

  This option enables the suggestion for ``const`` of the pointer itself.
  Pointer values have two possibilities to be ``const``, the pointer
  and the value pointing to. Default is `false`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    int value = 42;

    // Warning
    const int * pointer_variable = &value;
    // No warning
    const int *const pointer_variable = &value;

.. option:: WarnPointersAsPointers

  This option enables the suggestion for ``const`` of the value pointing to.
  Default is `true`.

  Requires :option:`AnalyzePointers` to be `true`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    int value = 42;

    // No warning
    const int *const pointer_variable = &value;
    // Warning
    int *const pointer_variable = &value;

.. option:: TransformValues

  Provides fixit-hints for value types that automatically add ``const`` if
  its a single declaration. Default is `true`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    // Before
    int value = 42;
    // After
    int const value = 42;

    // Before
    int a[] = {42, 42, 42};
    // After
    int const a[] = {42, 42, 42};

    // Result is modified later in its life-time. No diagnostic and fixit hint will be emitted.
    int result = value * 3;
    result -= 10;

.. option:: TransformReferences

  Provides fixit-hints for reference types that automatically add ``const`` if
  its a single declaration. Default is `true`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    // This variable could still be a constant. But because there is a non-const reference to
    // it, it can not be transformed (yet).
    int value = 42;
    // The reference 'ref_value' is not modified and can be made 'const int &ref_value = value;'
    // Before
    int &ref_value = value;
    // After
    int const &ref_value = value;

    // Result is modified later in its life-time. No diagnostic and fixit hint will be emitted.
    int result = ref_value * 3;
    result -= 10;

.. option:: TransformPointersAsValues

  Provides fixit-hints for pointers if their pointee is not changed. This does
  not analyze if the value-pointed-to is unchanged! Default is `false`.

  Requires 'WarnPointersAsValues' to be 'true'.

  .. code-block:: c++

    int value = 42;

    // Before
    const int * pointer_variable = &value;
    // After
    const int *const pointer_variable = &value;

    // Before
    const int * a[] = {&value, &value};
    // After
    const int *const a[] = {&value, &value};

    // Before
    int *ptr_value = &value;
    // After
    int *const ptr_value = &value;

    int result = 100 * (*ptr_value); // Does not modify the pointer itself.
    // This modification of the pointee is still allowed and not diagnosed.
    *ptr_value = 0;

    // The following pointer may not become a 'int *const'.
    int *changing_pointee = &value;
    changing_pointee = &result;

.. option:: TransformPointersAsPointers

  Provides fix-it hints for pointers if the value it pointing to is not changed.
  Default is `false`.

  Requires :option:`WarnPointersAsPointers` to be `true`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    int value = 42;

    // Before
    int * pointer_variable = &value;
    // After
    const int * pointer_variable = &value;

    // Before
    int * a[] = {&value, &value};
    // After
    const int * a[] = {&value, &value};

.. option:: AllowedTypes

  A semicolon-separated list of names of types that will be excluded from
  const-correctness checking. Regular expressions are accepted, e.g.
  ``[Rr]ef(erence)?$`` matches every type with suffix ``Ref``, ``ref``,
  ``Reference`` and ``reference``. If a name in the list contains the sequence
  `::`, it is matched against the qualified type name
  (i.e. ``namespace::Type``), otherwise it is matched against only the type
  name (i.e. ``Type``). Default is empty string.

Commit message:

Add options to control analyzing auto variables and lambdas

clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/misc/const-correctness.rst, after:

.. title:: clang-tidy - misc-const-correctness

misc-const-correctness
======================

This check implements detection of local variables which could be declared as
``const`` but are not. Declaring variables as ``const`` is required or
recommended by many coding guidelines, such as:
`ES.25 <https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#es25-declare-an-object-const-or-constexpr-unless-you-want-to-modify-its-value-later-on>`_
from the C++ Core Guidelines.

Please note that this check's analysis is type-based only. Variables that are
not modified but used to create a non-const handle that might escape the scope
are not diagnosed as potential ``const``.

.. code-block:: c++

  // Declare a variable, which is not ``const`` ...
  int i = 42;
  // but use it as read-only. This means that `i` can be declared ``const``.
  int result = i * i;       // Before transformation
  int const result = i * i; // After transformation

The check can analyze values, pointers and references and pointees:

.. code-block:: c++

  // Normal values like built-ins or objects.
  int potential_const_int = 42;       // Before transformation
  int const potential_const_int = 42; // After transformation
  int copy_of_value = potential_const_int;

  MyClass could_be_const;       // Before transformation
  MyClass const could_be_const; // After transformation
  could_be_const.const_qualified_method();

  // References can be declared const as well.
  int &reference_value = potential_const_int;       // Before transformation
  int const& reference_value = potential_const_int; // After transformation
  int another_copy = reference_value;

  // The similar semantics of pointers are analyzed.
  int *pointer_variable = &potential_const_int; // Before transformation
  int const*const pointer_variable = &potential_const_int; // After transformation, both pointer itself and pointee are supported.
  int last_copy = *pointer_variable;

The automatic code transformation is only applied to variables that are
declared in single declarations. You may want to prepare your code base with
:doc:`readability-isolate-declaration <../readability/isolate-declaration>` first.

Note that there is the check
:doc:`cppcoreguidelines-avoid-non-const-global-variables <../cppcoreguidelines/avoid-non-const-global-variables>`
to enforce ``const`` correctness on all globals.


Limitations
-----------

The check does not run on `C` code.

The check will not analyze templated variables or variables that are
instantiation dependent. Different instantiations can result in
different ``const`` correctness properties and in general it is not
possible to find all instantiations of a template. The template might
be used differently in an independent translation unit.

Options
-------

.. option:: AnalyzeValues

  Enable or disable the analysis of ordinary value variables, like
  ``int i = 42;``. Default is `true`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    // Warning
    int i = 42;
    // No warning
    int const i = 42;

    // Warning
    int a[] = {42, 42, 42};
    // No warning
    int const a[] = {42, 42, 42};

.. option:: AnalyzeReferences

  Enable or disable the analysis of reference variables, like
  ``int &ref = i;``. Default is `true`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    int i = 42;
    // Warning
    int& ref = i;
    // No warning
    int const& ref = i;

.. option:: AnalyzePointers

  Enable or disable the analysis of pointers variables, like
  ``int *ptr = &i;``. For specific checks, see
  :option:`WarnPointersAsValues` and :option:`WarnPointersAsPointers`.
  Default is `true`.

.. option:: AnalyzeAutoVariables

  Enable or disable the analysis of variables declared with ``auto``,
  such as ``auto i = 10;`` or ``auto *ptr = &i``. Default is `true`.

.. option:: AnalyzeLambdas

  Enable or disable the analysis of lambda variables, like
  ``auto f = [] { return 10; };``. For this option to have any
  effect, `AnalyzeAutoVariables` must be `true` as well.
  Default is `true`.

.. option:: WarnPointersAsValues

  This option enables the suggestion for ``const`` of the pointer itself.
  Pointer values have two possibilities to be ``const``, the pointer
  and the value pointing to. Default is `false`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    int value = 42;

    // Warning
    const int * pointer_variable = &value;
    // No warning
    const int *const pointer_variable = &value;

.. option:: WarnPointersAsPointers

  This option enables the suggestion for ``const`` of the value pointing to.
  Default is `true`.

  Requires :option:`AnalyzePointers` to be `true`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    int value = 42;

    // No warning
    const int *const pointer_variable = &value;
    // Warning
    int *const pointer_variable = &value;

.. option:: TransformValues

  Provides fixit-hints for value types that automatically add ``const`` if
  its a single declaration. Default is `true`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    // Before
    int value = 42;
    // After
    int const value = 42;

    // Before
    int a[] = {42, 42, 42};
    // After
    int const a[] = {42, 42, 42};

    // Result is modified later in its life-time. No diagnostic and fixit hint will be emitted.
    int result = value * 3;
    result -= 10;

.. option:: TransformReferences

  Provides fixit-hints for reference types that automatically add ``const`` if
  its a single declaration. Default is `true`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    // This variable could still be a constant. But because there is a non-const reference to
    // it, it can not be transformed (yet).
    int value = 42;
    // The reference 'ref_value' is not modified and can be made 'const int &ref_value = value;'
    // Before
    int &ref_value = value;
    // After
    int const &ref_value = value;

    // Result is modified later in its life-time. No diagnostic and fixit hint will be emitted.
    int result = ref_value * 3;
    result -= 10;

.. option:: TransformPointersAsValues

  Provides fixit-hints for pointers if their pointee is not changed. This does
  not analyze if the value-pointed-to is unchanged! Default is `false`.

  Requires 'WarnPointersAsValues' to be 'true'.

  .. code-block:: c++

    int value = 42;

    // Before
    const int * pointer_variable = &value;
    // After
    const int *const pointer_variable = &value;

    // Before
    const int * a[] = {&value, &value};
    // After
    const int *const a[] = {&value, &value};

    // Before
    int *ptr_value = &value;
    // After
    int *const ptr_value = &value;

    int result = 100 * (*ptr_value); // Does not modify the pointer itself.
    // This modification of the pointee is still allowed and not diagnosed.
    *ptr_value = 0;

    // The following pointer may not become a 'int *const'.
    int *changing_pointee = &value;
    changing_pointee = &result;

.. option:: TransformPointersAsPointers

  Provides fix-it hints for pointers if the value it pointing to is not changed.
  Default is `false`.

  Requires :option:`WarnPointersAsPointers` to be `true`.

  .. code-block:: c++

    int value = 42;

    // Before
    int * pointer_variable = &value;
    // After
    const int * pointer_variable = &value;

    // Before
    int * a[] = {&value, &value};
    // After
    const int * a[] = {&value, &value};

.. option:: AllowedTypes

  A semicolon-separated list of names of types that will be excluded from
  const-correctness checking. Regular expressions are accepted, e.g.
  ``[Rr]ef(erence)?$`` matches every type with suffix ``Ref``, ``ref``,
  ``Reference`` and ``reference``. If a name in the list contains the sequence
  `::`, it is matched against the qualified type name
  (i.e. ``namespace::Type``), otherwise it is matched against only the type
  name (i.e. ``Type``). Default is empty string.
