=================
DirectX Container
=================

.. contents::
   :local:

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

Overview
========

The DirectX Container (DXContainer) file format is the binary file format for
compiled shaders targeting the DirectX runtime. The file format is also called
the DXIL Container or DXBC file format. Because the file format can be used to
include either DXIL or DXBC compiled shaders, the nomenclature in LLVM is simply
DirectX Container.

DirectX Container files are read by the compiler and associated tools as well as
the DirectX runtime, profiling tools and other users. This document serves as a
companion to the implementation in LLVM to more completely document the file
format for its many users.

Basic Structure
===============

A DXContainer file begins with a header, and is then followed by a sequence of
"parts", which are analogous to object file sections. Each part contains a part
header, and some number of bytes of data after the header in a defined format.

DX Container data structures are encoded little-endian in the binary file.

The LLVM versions of all data structures described and/or referenced in this
file are defined in
`llvm/include/llvm/BinaryFormat/DXContainer.h
<https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/llvm/include/llvm/BinaryFormat/DXContainer.h>`_.
Some pseudo code is provided in blocks below to ease understanding of this
document, but reading it with the header available will provide the most
clarity.

File Header
-----------

.. code-block:: c

  struct Header {
    uint8_t Magic[4];
    uint8_t Digest[16];
    uint16_t MajorVersion;
    uint16_t MinorVersion;
    uint32_t FileSize;
    uint32_t PartCount;
  };

The DXContainer header matches the pseudo-definition above. It begins with a
four character code (magic number) with the value ``DXBC`` to denote the file
format.

The ``Digest`` is a 128bit hash digest computed with a proprietary algorithm and
encoded in the binary by the bytecode validator.

The ``MajorVersion`` and ``MinorVersion`` encode the file format version
``1.0``.

The remaining fields encode 32-bit unsigned integers for the file size and
number of parts.

Following the part header is an array of ``PartCount`` 32-bit unsigned integers
specifying the offsets of each part header.

Part Data
---------

.. code-block:: c

  struct PartHeader {
    uint8_t Name[4];
    uint32_t Size;
  }

Each part begins with a part header. A part header includes the 4-character part
name, and a 32-bit unsigned integer specifying the size of the part data. The
part header is followed by ``Size`` bytes of data comprising the part. The
format does not explicitly require 32-bit alignment of parts, although LLVM does
implement this restriction in the writer code (because it's a good idea). The
LLVM object reader code does not assume inputs are correctly aligned to avoid
undefined behavior caused by misaligned inputs generated by other compilers.

The :ref:`PRIV <PRIV>` part is an exception: DXContainer writer code in LLVM may
produce a PRIV part with size which is not a multiple of four bytes.

Part Formats
============

The part name indicates the format of the part data. There are 24 part headers
used by DXC and FXC. Not all compiled shaders contain all parts. In the list
below parts generated only by DXC are marked with †, and parts generated only by
FXC are marked with \*.

#. `DXIL`_† - Stores the DXIL bytecode.
#. `HASH`_† - Stores the shader MD5 hash.
#. `ILDB`_† - Stores the DXIL bytecode with LLVM Debug Information embedded in the module.
#. `ILDN`_† - Stores shader debug name for external debug information.
#. `ISG1`_ - Stores the input signature for Shader Model 5.1+.
#. ISGN\* - Stores the input signature for Shader Model 4 and earlier.
#. `OSG1`_ - Stores the output signature for Shader Model 5.1+.
#. OSG5\* - Stores the output signature for Shader Model 5.
#. OSGN\* - Stores the output signature for Shader Model 4 and earlier.
#. PCSG\* - Stores the patch constant signature for Shader Model 5.1 and earlier.
#. PDBI† - Stores PDB information.
#. `PRIV`_† - Stores private data, including embedded companion PDB files.
#. `PSG1`_ - Stores the patch constant signature for Shader Model 6+.
#. `PSV0`_ - Stores Pipeline State Validation data.
#. RDAT† - Stores Runtime Data.
#. RDEF\* - Stores resource definitions.
#. `RTS0`_ - Stores compiled root signature.
#. `SFI0`_ - Stores shader feature flags.
#. SHDR\* - Stores compiled DXBC bytecode.
#. SHEX\* - Stores compiled DXBC bytecode.
#. DXBC\* - Stores compiled DXBC bytecode.
#. `SRCI`_† - Stores shader source information.
#. STAT† - Stores shader statistics.
#. `VERS`_† - Stores shader compiler version information.

DXIL Part
---------
.. _DXIL:

The DXIL part is comprised of three data structures: the ``ProgramHeader``, the
``BitcodeHeader`` and the bitcode serialized LLVM 3.7 IR Module.

The ``ProgramHeader`` contains the shader model version and pipeline stage
enumeration value. This identifies the target profile of the contained shader
bitcode.

The ``BitcodeHeader`` contains the DXIL version information and refers to the
start of the bitcode data.

HASH Part
---------
.. _HASH:

The HASH part contains a 32-bit unsigned integer with the shader hash flags, and
a 128-bit MD5 hash digest. The flags field can either have the value ``0`` to
indicate no flags, or ``1`` to indicate that the file hash was computed
including the source code that produced the binary. See :ref:`Compiler Flags
<compiler_flags>` for how ``/Zss`` and ``/Zsb`` select the hashed bitcode.

ILDB Part
---------
.. _ILDB:

The ILDB part follows the structure of the `DXIL`_ part. It stores the
unstripped DXIL bitcode module with debug information embedded.

The ILDB part is emitted when the shader is compiled with full debug information
(``/Zi``). It is omitted from all outputs when slim debug (``/Zs``) is used.
See :ref:`Compiler Flags <compiler_flags>` for how ``/Qembed_debug``,
``/Qstrip_debug``, ``/Fd``, and ``/Zs`` control whether it appears in the main
output, the companion PDB, or both.

The stripped `DXIL`_ part has the ``Dwarf Version`` and ``Debug Info Version``
module flags removed, and ``dx.source`` metadata nodes are stripped from it.
Those nodes are preserved in the ILDB module when ``/Qsource_in_debug_module``
is used; otherwise they are replaced with empty placeholder values in the ILDB
module written to the companion PDB file.

.. rubric:: Reading this part

When the ILDB part is present in a DXContainer file, :program:`obj2yaml` prints
it under a ``Program`` mapping with the embedded DXIL bitcode. Use
:program:`llvm-objcopy` to extract the raw bitcode, then :program:`llvm-dis` to
disassemble it::

  llvm-objcopy --dump-section=ILDB=shader.bc shader.dxbc
  llvm-dis shader.bc

When the ILDB part is stored in a companion PDB file, use :program:`llvm-pdbutil`
to access it (see :doc:`llvm-pdbutil <../CommandGuide/llvm-pdbutil>`).

ILDN Part
---------
.. _ILDN:

The ILDN part stores the name of the companion PDB file used for external
debug information. It is always emitted when the shader is compiled with debug
information, and is included in both the main DXContainer output and the
companion PDB file.

The part begins with a ``DebugNameHeader`` followed by a null-terminated UTF-8
string containing the debug file name:

.. code-block:: c

  struct DebugNameHeader {
    uint16_t Flags;
    uint16_t NameLength;
  };

The ``Flags`` field is reserved and must be zero. ``NameLength`` is the length
of the debug file name in bytes, not including the null terminator.

If no PDB output path is specified, the debug file name defaults to
``<MD5 hash>.pdb``, where ``<MD5 hash>`` is the stringified MD5 digest from the
`HASH`_ part. See :ref:`Compiler Flags <compiler_flags>` for how ``/Fd``, ``/Zss``,
and ``/Zsb`` affect the debug file name and hash computation.

.. rubric:: Reading this part

When the ILDN part is present in a DXContainer file, :program:`obj2yaml` prints
it under a ``DebugName`` mapping.

PRIV Part
---------
.. _PRIV:

The PRIV part stores opaque binary data. DXC may emit it when the ``/Qpdb_in_private``
flag is used to embed the companion debug info PDB file in the main DXContainer output.

The part data may also hold arbitrary user-provided binary blobs attached by
custom tooling.

Unlike most other parts, the PRIV part data does not need to be padded to a
4-byte boundary. Thus, when a PRIV part is present, it must be the last part in the
container. LLVM enforces this constraint in both the object reader and the
ObjectYAML writer. A DXContainer may contain at most one PRIV part.

.. rubric:: Reading this part

When the PRIV part is present in a DXContainer file, :program:`obj2yaml` prints
it under a ``PrivateData`` mapping.

Use :program:`llvm-objcopy` to extract the raw part data::

  llvm-objcopy --dump-section=PRIV=output.priv shader.dxbc


SRCI Part
---------
.. _SRCI:

The SRCI part stores shader source information extracted from ``dx.source``
metadata in the LLVM module. It is emitted when source information is available.
See :ref:`Compiler Flags <compiler_flags>` for output placement and related flags.

The SRCI part is written only to the companion PDB file. It consists of a part
header followed by three 4-byte aligned sections. Each section begins with a
``SectionHeader`` and is followed by section-specific data:

.. code-block:: c

  struct Header {
    uint32_t AlignedSizeInBytes;
    uint16_t Flags;
    uint16_t SectionCount;
  };

  struct SectionHeader {
    uint32_t AlignedSizeInBytes;
    uint16_t Flags;
    uint16_t Type;
  };

The part ``Flags`` field is reserved and must be zero. ``SectionCount`` must be
``3``. Each section ``Flags`` field is reserved and must be zero. The
``Type`` field identifies the section. The section type values are:

.. code-block:: c

  SOURCE_INFO_TYPE(0, SourceContents)
  SOURCE_INFO_TYPE(1, SourceNames)
  SOURCE_INFO_TYPE(2, Args)

Source Names Section
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The source names section stores the file names of the HLSL translation units
that contributed source to the shader. It begins with a section header of type
``SourceNames``, followed by a section-specific header and a sequence of name
entries:

.. code-block:: c

  struct SourceNamesHeader {
    uint32_t Flags;
    uint32_t Count;
    uint16_t EntriesSizeInBytes;
  };

  struct SourceNamesEntry {
    uint32_t AlignedSizeInBytes;
    uint32_t Flags;
    uint32_t NameSizeInBytes;
    uint32_t ContentSizeInBytes;
  };

The section-specific ``Flags`` field is reserved and must be zero. ``Count`` is
the number of entries that follow. ``EntriesSizeInBytes`` is the total size of
the entry data following the section-specific header, including entry padding.

Each entry is 4-byte aligned. The first entry is usually the main shader source
file, and the remaining entries are sorted by file name.

Each entry is followed by a null-terminated UTF-8 file name of length
``NameSizeInBytes``. The ``ContentSizeInBytes`` field records the size of the
corresponding source content entry in the source contents section, including its
null terminator.

Source Contents Section
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The source contents section stores the HLSL source text for each file named in
the source names section. It begins with a section header of type
``SourceContents``, followed by a section-specific header and the (optionally
compressed) entry data:

.. code-block:: c

  struct SourceContentsHeader {
    uint32_t AlignedSizeInBytes;
    uint16_t Flags;
    uint16_t Type;
    uint32_t EntriesSizeInBytes;
    uint32_t UncompressedEntriesSizeInBytes;
    uint32_t Count;
  };

  struct SourceContentsEntry {
    uint32_t AlignedSizeInBytes;
    uint32_t Flags;
    uint32_t ContentSizeInBytes;
  };

The section-specific ``Flags`` field is reserved and must be zero. The
``Type`` field specifies the compression applied to the entry data. The
compression type values are:

.. code-block:: c

  COMPRESSION_TYPE(0, None)
  COMPRESSION_TYPE(1, Zlib)

When no compression is used, ``EntriesSizeInBytes`` and
``UncompressedEntriesSizeInBytes`` are equal.

When Zlib compression is used, the bytes following the section-specific header
contain the compressed aggregate of all entries. After decompression, the data is
a sequence of ``Count`` entries.

Each uncompressed entry is 4-byte aligned and is followed by a null-terminated
UTF-8 string containing the file source text.

The entries must appear in the same order as the entries in the source names
section.

Args Section
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The args section stores the HLSL compiler command-line arguments used to produce
the shader. It begins with a section header of type ``Args``, followed by a
section-specific header and the argument data:

.. code-block:: c

  struct ArgsHeader {
    uint32_t Flags;
    uint32_t SizeInBytes;
    uint32_t Count;
  };

The section-specific ``Flags`` field is reserved and must be zero.
``SizeInBytes`` is the total size of the argument data following the
section-specific header. ``Count`` is the number of argument pairs that
follow.

The header is followed by ``Count`` argument pairs. Each pair consists of two
null-terminated UTF-8 strings: an argument name and an argument value.

Padding is not applied between argument pairs. The section is padded with zero
bytes at the end to a 4-byte boundary.

.. rubric:: Reading this part

The SRCI part is normally found in a companion PDB file rather than the main
DXContainer output. When present, :program:`obj2yaml` prints it under a
``SourceInfo`` mapping.

To read SRCI part from a companion PDB file, use :program:`llvm-pdbutil`.

VERS Part
---------
.. _VERS:

The VERS part stores compiler version information. It is emitted when the
shader is compiled with debug information. When a companion PDB file is produced,
the VERS part is written to that file. When compiling a shader library, the VERS
part is also written to the main DXContainer output.

The part begins with a ``CompilerVersionHeader`` followed by two sequential
null-terminated UTF-8 strings: the compiler commit SHA and a custom version
string:

.. code-block:: c

  struct CompilerVersionHeader {
    uint16_t Major;
    uint16_t Minor;
    uint32_t Flags;
    uint32_t CommitCount;
    uint32_t ContentSizeInBytes;
  };

``Major`` and ``Minor`` encode the compiler version.

The ``Flags`` field is a bitmask. The flag values are:

* ``Default`` (``0``) - default value
* ``Debug`` (``1``) - indicates whether the compiler was built in debug mode
* ``Internal`` (``2``) - indicates whether the shader was modified by a validator

``CommitCount`` records how many commits are reachable from the compiler's HEAD
revision. In DXC, this is the value produced by ``git rev-list --count HEAD``
in the compiler repository.
LLVM always emits ``0`` for ``CommitCount``. This is a deliberate difference
from DXC; the commit SHA in the part data is considered sufficient for
identifying the compiler build.

``ContentSizeInBytes`` is the combined size of the commit SHA and custom version
strings, including their null terminators but excluding any trailing part padding.

.. rubric:: Reading this part

When the VERS part is present in a DXContainer file, :program:`obj2yaml` prints
it under a ``CompilerVersion`` mapping.

To read VERS part from a companion PDB file, use :program:`llvm-pdbutil`.

Program Signature (SG1) Parts
-----------------------------
.. _ISG1:
.. _OSG1:
.. _PSG1:

.. code-block:: c

  struct ProgramSignatureHeader {
    uint32_t ParamCount;
    uint32_t FirstParamOffset;
  }

The program signature parts (ISG1, OSG1, & PSG1) all use the same data
structures to encode inputs, outputs and patch information. The
``ProgramSignatureHeader`` includes two 32-bit unsigned integers to specify the
number of signature parameters and the offset of the first parameter.

Beginning at ``FirstParamOffset`` bytes from the start of the
``ProgramSignatureHeader``, ``ParamCount`` ``ProgramSignatureElement``
structures are written. Following the ``ProgramSignatureElements`` is a string
table of null terminated strings padded to 32-byte alignment. This string table
matches the DWARF string table format as implemented by LLVM.

Each ``ProgramSignatureElement`` encodes a ``NameOffset`` value which specifies
the offset into the string table. A value of ``0`` denotes no name. The offsets
encoded here are from the beginning of the ``ProgramSignatureHeader`` not the
beginning of the string table.

The ``ProgramSignatureElement`` contains several enumeration fields which are
defined in `llvm/include/llvm/BinaryFormat/DXContainerConstants.def <https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/llvm/include/llvm/BinaryFormat/DXContainerConstants.def>`_.
These fields encode the D3D system value, the type of data and its precision
requirements.

PSV0 Part
---------
.. _PSV0:

The Pipeline State Validation data encodes versioned runtime information
structures. These structures use a scheme where in lieu of encoding a version
number, they encode the size of the structure and each new version of the
structure is additive. This allows readers to infer the version of the structure
by comparing the encoded size with the size of known structures. If the encoded
size is larger than any known structure, the largest known structure can validly
parse the data represented in the known structure.

In LLVM we represent the versions of the associated data structures with
versioned namespaces under the ``llvm::dxbc::PSV`` namespace (e.g. ``v0``,
``v1``). Each structure in the ``v0`` namespace is the base version, the
structures in the ``v1`` namespace inherit from the ``v0`` namespace, and the
``v2`` structures inherit from the ``v1`` structures, and so on.

The high-level structure of the PSV data is:

#. ``RuntimeInfo`` structure
#. Resource bindings
#. Signature elements
#. Mask Vectors (Output, Input, InputPatch, PatchOutput)

Immediately following the part header for the PSV0 part is a 32-bit unsigned
integer specifying the size of the ``RuntimeInfo`` structure that follows.

Immediately following the ``RuntimeInfo`` structure is a 32-bit unsigned integer
specifying the number of resource bindings. If the number of resources is
greater than zero, another unsigned 32-bit integer follows to specify the size
of the ``ResourceBindInfo`` structure. This is followed by the specified number
of structures of the specified size (which infers the version of the structure).

For version 0 of the data this ends the part data.

PSV0 Signature Elements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The signature elements are conceptually a single concept but the data is encoded
in three different blocks. The first block is a string table, the second block
is an index table, and the third block is the elements themselves, which in turn
are separeated by input, output and patch constant or primitive elements.

Signature elements capture much of the same data captured in the :ref:`SG1
<ISG1>` parts. The use of an index table allows de-duplication of data for a more
compact final representation.

The string table begins with a 32-bit unsigned integer specifying the table
size. This string table uses the DXContainer format as implemented in LLVM. This
format prefixes the string table with a null byte so that offset ``0`` is a null
string, and pads to 32-byte alignment.

The index table begins with a 32-bit unsigned integer specifying the size of the
table, and is followed by that many 32-bit unsigned integers representing the
table. The index table may or may not deduplicate repeated sequences (both DXC
and Clang do). The indices signify the indices in the flattened aggregate
representation which the signature element describes. A single semantic may have
more than one entry in this table to denote the different attributes of its
members.

For example given the following code:

.. code-block:: c

  struct VSOut_1
  {
      float4 f3 : VOUT2;
      float3 f4 : VOUT3;
  };


  struct VSOut
  {
      float4 f1 : VOUT0;
      float2 f2[4] : VOUT1;
      VSOut_1 s;
      int4 f5 : VOUT4;
  };

  void main(out VSOut o1 : A) {
  }

The semantic ``A`` gets expanded into 5 output signature elements. Those
elements are:

.. note::

  In the example below, it is a coincidence that the rows match the indices, in
  more complicated examples with multiple semantics this is not the case.

#. Index 0 starts at row 0, contains 4 columns, and is float32. This represents
   ``f1`` in the source.
#. Index 1, 2, 3, and 4 starts at row 1, contains two columns and is float32.
   This represents ``f2`` in the source, and it spreads across rows 1 - 4.
#. Index 5 starts at row 5, contains 4 columns, and is float32. This represents
   ``f3`` in the source.
#. Index 6 starts at row 6, contains 3 columns, and is float32. This represents
   ``f4``.
#. Index 7 starts at row 7, contains 4 columns, and is signed 32-bit integer.
   This represents ``f5`` in the source.

The LLVM ``obj2yaml`` tool can parse this data out of the PSV and present it in
human-readable YAML. For the example above it produces the output:

.. code-block:: YAML

  SigOutputElements:
    - Name:            A
      Indices:         [ 0 ]
      StartRow:        0
      Cols:            4
      StartCol:        0
      Allocated:       true
      Kind:            Arbitrary
      ComponentType:   Float32
      Interpolation:   Linear
      DynamicMask:     0x0
      Stream:          0
    - Name:            A
      Indices:         [ 1, 2, 3, 4 ]
      StartRow:        1
      Cols:            2
      StartCol:        0
      Allocated:       true
      Kind:            Arbitrary
      ComponentType:   Float32
      Interpolation:   Linear
      DynamicMask:     0x0
      Stream:          0
    - Name:            A
      Indices:         [ 5 ]
      StartRow:        5
      Cols:            4
      StartCol:        0
      Allocated:       true
      Kind:            Arbitrary
      ComponentType:   Float32
      Interpolation:   Linear
      DynamicMask:     0x0
      Stream:          0
    - Name:            A
      Indices:         [ 6 ]
      StartRow:        6
      Cols:            3
      StartCol:        0
      Allocated:       true
      Kind:            Arbitrary
      ComponentType:   Float32
      Interpolation:   Linear
      DynamicMask:     0x0
      Stream:          0
    - Name:            A
      Indices:         [ 7 ]
      StartRow:        7
      Cols:            4
      StartCol:        0
      Allocated:       true
      Kind:            Arbitrary
      ComponentType:   SInt32
      Interpolation:   Constant
      DynamicMask:     0x0
      Stream:          0

The number of signature elements of each type is encoded in the
``llvm::dxbc::PSV::v1::RuntimeInfo`` structure. If any of the element count
values are non-zero, the size of the ``ProgramSignatureElement`` structure is
encoded next to allow versioning of that structure. Today there is only one
version. Following the size field is the specified number of signature elements
in the order input, output, then patch constant or primitive.

Following the signature elements is a sequence of mask vectors encoded as a
series of 32-bit integers. Each 32-bit integer in the mask encodes values for 8
input/output/patch or primitive elements. The mask vector is filled from least
significant bit to most significant bit with each added element shifting the
previous elements left. A reader needs to consult the total number of vectors
encoded in the ``RuntimeInfo`` structure to know how to read the mask vector.

If the shader has ``UsesViewID`` enabled in the ``RuntimeInfo`` an output mask
vector will be included. The output mask vector is four arrays of 32-bit
unsigned integers. Each of the four arrays corresponds to an output stream.
Geometry shaders have a maximum of four output streams, all other shader stages
only support one output stream. Each bit in the mask vector identifies one
column of an output from the output signature depends on the ViewID.

If the shader has ``UsesViewID`` enabled, it is a hull shader, and it has patch
constant or primitive vector elements, a patch constant or primitive vector mask
will be included. It is identical in structure to the output mask vector. Each
bit in the mask vector identifies one column of a patch constant output which
depends on the ViewID.

The next series of mask vectors are similar in structure to the output mask
vector, but they contain an extra dimension.

The output/input map is encoded next if the shader has inputs and outputs. The
output/input mask encodes which outputs are impacted by each column of each
input. The size for each mask vector is the size of the output max vector * the
number of inputs * 4 (for each component). Each bit in the mask vector
identifies one column of an output and a column of an input. A value of 1 means
the output is impacted by the input.

If the shader is a hull shader, and it has inputs and patch outputs, an input to
patch map will be included next. This is identical in structure to the
output/input map. The dimensions are defined by the size of the patch constant
or primitive vector mask * the number of inputs * 4 (for each component). Each
bit in the mask vector identifies one column of a patch constant output and a
column of an input. A value of 1 means the output is impacted by the input.

If the shader is a domain shader, and it has outputs and patch outputs, an
output patch map will be included next. This is identical in structure to the
output/input map. The dimensions are defined by the size of the patch constant
or primitive vector mask * the number of outputs * 4 (for each component). Each
bit in the mask vector identifies one column of a patch constant input and a
column of an output. A value of 1 means the output is impacted by the primitive
input.

Root Signature (RTS0) Part
--------------------------
.. _RTS0:

The Root Signature data defines the shader's resource interface with Direct3D 
12, specifying what resources the shader needs to access and how they're 
organized and bound to the pipeline. 

The RTS0 part comprises three data structures: ``RootSignatureHeader``, 
``RootParameters`` and ``StaticSamplers``. The details of each will be described 
in the following sections. All ``RootParameters`` will be serialized following 
the order they were defined in the metadata representation.

The table below summarizes the data being serialized as well as it's size. The 
details of it part will be discussed in further details on the next sections 
of this document.

======================== =========================================== =============================
Part Name                Size In Bytes                                 Maximum number of Instances 
======================== =========================================== =============================
Root Signature Header    24                                          1               
Root Parameter Headers   12                                          Many              
Root Parameter           ================================ ===        Many
                         Root Constants                   12                                      
                         Root Descriptor Version 1.0      8                                      
                         Root Descriptor Version 1.1      12                                      
                         Descriptors Tables Version 1.0   20                                     
                         Descriptors Tables Version 1.1   24                                      
                         ================================ ===       
                                             
Static Samplers          52                                          Many              
======================== =========================================== =============================


Root Signature Header
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The root signature header is 24 bytes long, consisting of six 32-bit values
representing the version, number and offset of parameters, number and offset 
of static samplers, and a flags field for global behaviours:

.. code-block:: c

   struct RootSignatureHeader {
     uint32_t Version;
     uint32_t NumParameters;
     uint32_t ParametersOffset;
     uint32_t NumStaticSamplers;
     uint32_t StaticSamplerOffset;
     uint32_t Flags;
   }


Root Parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Root parameters define how resources are bound to the shader pipeline, each 
type having different size and fields. 

The slot of root parameters is preceded by a variable size section containing 
the header information for such parameters. Such structure is 12 bytes long, 
composed of three 32-bit values, representing the parameter type, a flag
encoding the pipeline stages where the data is visible, and an offset 
calculated from the start of RTS0 section.

.. code-block:: c

   struct RootParameterHeader {
     uint32_t ParameterType;
     uint32_t ShaderVisibility;
     uint32_t ParameterOffset;
   };

After the header information has been serialized, the actual data for each of the
root parameters is layout in a single continuous blob. The parameters can be fetch 
from such using the offset information, present in the header.

The following sections will describe each of the root parameters types and their 
encodings.

Root Constants
''''''''''''''

The root constants are inline 32-bit values that show up in the shader 
as a constant buffer. It is a 12 bytes long structure, two 32-bit values
encoding the register and space the constant is assigned to, and 
the last 32 bits encode the number of constants being defined in the buffer.

.. code-block:: c

  struct RootConstants {
    uint32_t Register;
    uint32_t Space;
    uint32_t NumOfConstants;
  };

Root Descriptor
'''''''''''''''

Root descriptors provide direct GPU memory addresses to resources.

In version 1.0, the root descriptor is 8 bytes. It encodes the register and
space as 2 32-bit values.

In version 1.1, the root descriptor is 12 bytes. It matches the 1.0 descriptor
but adds a 32-bit access flag.

.. code-block:: c

   struct RootDescriptor_V1_0 {
      uint32_t ShaderRegister;
      uint32_t RegisterSpace;
   };
   
   struct RootDescriptor_V1_1 {
      uint32_t ShaderRegister;
      uint32_t RegisterSpace;      
      uint32_t Flags;
   };

Root Descriptor Table
'''''''''''''''''''''

Descriptor tables let shaders access multiple resources through a single pointer 
to a descriptor heap. 

The tables are made of a collection of descriptor ranges. In Version 1.0, the 
descriptor range is 20 bytes, containing five 32-bit values. It encodes a range
of registers, including the register type, range length, register numbers and 
space within range and the offset locating each range inside the table.

In version 1.1, the descriptor range is 24 bytes. It matches the 1.0 descriptor
but adds a 32-bit access flag.

.. code-block:: c

   struct DescriptorRange_V1_0 {
      dxil::ResourceClass RangeType;
      uint32_t NumDescriptors;
      uint32_t BaseShaderRegister;
      uint32_t RegisterSpace;
      uint32_t OffsetInDescriptorsFromTableStart;
   };

   struct DescriptorRange_V1_1 {
      dxil::ResourceClass RangeType;
      uint32_t NumDescriptors;
      uint32_t BaseShaderRegister;
      uint32_t RegisterSpace;
      uint32_t Flags;
      uint32_t OffsetInDescriptorsFromTableStart;      
   };

Static Samplers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Static samplers are predefined filtering settings built into the root signature, 
avoiding descriptor heap lookups. 

This section also has a variable size, since it can contain multiple static 
samplers definitions. However, the definition is a fixed sized struct, 
containing 13 32-byte fields of various enum, float, and integer values. 

In version 1.2, the static sampler is 17 bytes. It matches the 1.0 static sampler
but adds a 32-bit access flag. In Version 1.1, it matches static sampler 
version 1.0.

.. code-block:: c

   struct StaticSamplerDesc {
      dxbc::FilterMode Filter; 
      dxbc::TextureAddressMode AddressU;
      dxbc::TextureAddressMode AddressV;
      dxbc::TextureAddressMode AddressW;
      float MipLODBias;
      uint32_t MaxAnisotropy;
      dxbc::ComparisonFunc ComparisonFunc; 
      dxbc::StaticBorderColor BorderColor;
      float MinLOD;
      float MaxLOD;
      uint32_t ShaderRegister;
      uint32_t RegisterSpace;
      dxbc::ShaderVisibility ShaderVisibility;
   };

SFI0 Part
---------
.. _SFI0:

The SFI0 part encodes a 64-bit unsigned integer bitmask of the feature flags.
This denotes which optional features the shader requires. The flag values are
defined in `llvm/include/llvm/BinaryFormat/DXContainerConstants.def <https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/llvm/include/llvm/BinaryFormat/DXContainerConstants.def>`_.

Compiler Flags
==============

.. _compiler_flags:

When compiling HLSL with :program:`dxc`, several flags control whether
debug information is embedded in the main DXContainer output, written to a
companion PDB file, or both. Use ``/Zi`` for full debug output or ``/Zs`` for
slim debug output without an `ILDB`_ part. In :program:`clang-dxc`, most
dxc-style flags are forwarded to :program:`llc` as ``-mllvm`` options.

Debug Output Locations
----------------------

Debug information is enabled with either ``/Zi`` (full debug) or ``/Zs`` (slim
debug). The two flags are mutually exclusive.

**Full debug with ``/Zi``**

When ``/Zi`` is enabled, the `ILDB`_ part can appear in the main DXContainer
output, in a companion PDB, or both:

* **Embedded in the main DXContainer output.** The `ILDB`_ part holds the
  unstripped DXIL module with debug information. It is included when
  ``/Qembed_debug`` is used. The main output always contains the stripped `DXIL`_
  part alongside other parts such as `HASH`_, `ILDN`_, and `VERS`_.
* **Omitted from the main DXContainer output.** When ``/Qstrip_debug`` is used,
  the `ILDB`_ part is not written to the main output. Other debug-related parts
  such as `ILDN`_ are still emitted. If ``/Fd`` is also specified, the `ILDB`_
  part is still written to the companion PDB. ``/Qstrip_debug`` takes precedence
  over the default ``/Qembed_debug`` behavior when ``/Zi`` is used without
  ``/Fd``. If both ``/Qstrip_debug`` and ``/Qembed_debug`` are specified,
  ``/Qstrip_debug`` is ignored and the `ILDB`_ part is embedded.
* **In a companion PDB file.** A sidecar ``.pdb`` stores a DXContainer stream
  with debug-related parts including `ILDB`_, `SRCI`_, and `VERS`_. This is
  produced when ``/Fd`` names an output path. Use :program:`llvm-pdbutil` to
  inspect or extract that stream (see
  :doc:`llvm-pdbutil <../CommandGuide/llvm-pdbutil>`).
* **Embedded in the private data of the main output.** When
  ``/Qpdb_in_private`` is used, a copy of the companion PDB file is stored as
  opaque bytes in `PRIV`_. This can be used with or without ``/Fd``; without
  ``/Fd``, the PDB is not retained as a separate file on disk. After extraction,
  tools treat the bytes as a standalone ``.pdb`` file.

``/Fd`` can be combined with ``/Qembed_debug`` or ``/Qpdb_in_private`` to
write full debug information to more than one location.

**Slim debug with ``/Zs``**

When ``/Zs`` is enabled, slim debug information is emitted. The `ILDB`_ part is
omitted from the main DXContainer output and from any companion PDB or `PRIV`_
embedding, but other debug-related parts such as `HASH`_, `ILDN`_, `SRCI`_, and
`VERS`_ are still emitted. A companion PDB from ``/Fd`` or a `PRIV`_ embedding
from ``/Qpdb_in_private`` therefore contains slim debug data only.

``/Zs`` cannot be combined with ``/Qembed_debug`` or ``/Qsource_in_debug_module``.

The table below summarizes the :program:`dxc` flags that affect this behavior.
The **llc flag** column lists the ``-mllvm`` option the driver forwards when
invoking the backend.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 20 20 40

   * - dxc flag
     - clang-dxc alternative
     - llc flag
     - Effect
   * - ``/Zi``
     - ``/Zi``, ``-g``
     -
     - Enable full debug information. Mutually exclusive with ``/Zs``. Required
       for ``/Qembed_debug`` and ``/Qstrip_debug``. The main `DXIL`_ part is
       stripped of debug metadata. If ``/Zi`` is used without ``/Fd``,
       ``/Qembed_debug``, and ``/Qstrip_debug``, the driver warns and enables
       ``/Qembed_debug`` by default.
   * - ``/Zs``
     - Not implemented yet
     - ``--dx-slim-debug``
     - Enable slim debug information. Mutually exclusive with ``/Zi``. Omits
       the `ILDB`_ part from all outputs while still emitting parts such as
       `ILDN`_, `SRCI`_, and `VERS`_. Incompatible with ``/Qembed_debug`` and
       ``/Qsource_in_debug_module``.
   * - ``/Fd``\ *path*
     - Not implemented yet
     - ``--dx-Fd=``\ *path*
     - Write a companion PDB file. Requires ``/Zi`` or ``/Zs``. The path is
       recorded in the `ILDN`_ part. If *path* ends with a directory separator,
       the file name defaults to ``<MD5 hash>.pdb`` from the `HASH`_ part in that
       directory; otherwise *path* is used as the PDB file name.
   * - ``/Qembed_debug``
     - Not implemented yet
     - ``--dx-embed-debug``
     - Embed the `ILDB`_ part and other debug parts in the main DXContainer
       output. Requires ``/Zi``. Takes precedence over ``/Qstrip_debug`` when
       both are specified.
   * - ``/Qstrip_debug``
     - ``/Qstrip_debug``
     - ``--dx-strip-debug``
     - Omit the `ILDB`_ part from the main DXContainer output. Requires ``/Zi``.
       The `ILDB`_ part is still written to a companion PDB
       when ``/Fd`` is specified. Prevents the default ``/Qembed_debug`` behavior
       when ``/Zi`` is used without ``/Fd``. Otherwise, ignored when
       ``/Qembed_debug`` is also specified.
   * - ``/Qpdb_in_private``
     - ``/Qpdb_in_private``
     - ``--dx-pdb-in-private``
     - Embed a copy of the companion PDB in the `PRIV`_ part of the main
       DXContainer output. Requires ``/Zi`` or ``/Zs``. When ``/Fd`` is also
       specified, the PDB is written to that path as well. Without ``/Fd``, the
       PDB is built in a temporary file, copied into `PRIV`_, and not retained
       on disk. With ``/Zs``, the embedded PDB contains slim debug data without
       an `ILDB`_ part.
   * - ``/Zss``
     - ``/Zss``
     - ``--dx-Zss``
     - Compute the `HASH`_ digest from the `ILDB`_ bitcode and set the
       ``IncludesSource`` hash flag. Requires ``/Zi`` or ``/Zs``.
   * - ``/Zsb``
     - ``/Zsb``
     -
     - Default behavior. Compute the `HASH`_ digest from the stripped `DXIL`_
       bitcode.
   * - ``/Qsource_in_debug_module``
     - ``/Qsource_in_debug_module``
     - ``--dx-source-in-debug-module``
     - Embed HLSL source in the `ILDB`_ module via ``dx.source`` metadata
       instead of emitting a separate `SRCI`_ part.
   * -
     - ``-fdx-no-source-metadata``
     -
     - Do not embed ``dx.source`` metadata in the LLVM module, which prevents
       `SRCI`_ generation.

Part Placement
--------------

The table below shows where each debug-related part is written for a typical
shader compile. ``Yes`` means the part is present in that output whenever its
preconditions are met.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 12 28 28 32

   * - Part
     - Main output
     - Companion PDB (as a separate file or embedded into private data)
     - Preconditions / notes
   * - `DXIL`_
     - Yes
     - No
     -
   * - `ILDB`_
     - If ``/Qembed_debug`` (default when ``/Zi`` is used without ``/Fd`` and
       ``/Qstrip_debug``)
     - Yes
     - Omitted when ``/Zs`` is used. Omitted from the main output when
       ``/Qstrip_debug`` is used, or when ``/Fd`` is used without
       ``/Qembed_debug``.
   * - `ILDN`_
     - Yes
     - Yes
     -
   * - `HASH`_
     - Yes
     - Yes
     -
   * - `SRCI`_
     - No
     - Yes
     - Requires available source metadata. Not emitted when
       ``/Qsource_in_debug_module`` or ``-fdx-no-source-metadata`` is used.
   * - `VERS`_
     - Yes
     - Yes
     -
   * - `PRIV`_
     - If ``/Qpdb_in_private``
     - No
     - Holds a copy of the companion PDB file.
