<!--===- docs/MeetingNotes/2026/2026-01-28.md

   Part of the LLVM Project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM Exceptions.
   See https://llvm.org/LICENSE.txt for license information.
   SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception

-->
# Combined Call 2026-01-28

## Agenda

* Design docs and/or RFCs
  * Flang failure with thin lto on LLVM 22-RC1 \- Thank you for fixing it\!
    * [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/176404](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/176404)
  * [\[RFC\] What to do regarding the Flang Call Notes document](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-what-to-do-regarding-the-flang-call-notes-document/89450)
    * Proposal: in the Flang repo
      * This Google doc becomes a working document for drafting the agenda, taking notes during the call
      * Post the agenda the day before the meeting, indicate to edit document directly with additional items or other changes, reply to the Slack post if that is not possible
      * flang/docs/MeetingNotes/YYYY/
        * files of finalized notes go in this directory, in a file like YYYY-MM-DD.md
      * flang/docs/MeetingNotes/README.md contains the boilerplate information, point to the GettingStarted.md document for call information to avoid tracking in two different places
  * [\[RFC\] Support classic flang driver options in flang](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-support-classic-flang-driver-options-in-flang/89380)
    * Suggestion was to accept the alternate spellings but give a deprecation warning immediately to encourage migrating to the regular spelling
    * Time frame for full deprecation/removal?
    * Should classic Flang be treated like a totally separate compiler, like Intel vs. Cray?
  * [\[RFC\] Automatic static promotion of large local variables in Flang](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-automatic-static-promotion-of-large-local-variables-in-flang/89539)
    * There is a similar issue with OpenMP privatize
    * Michael Kruse \- If you do this, you run out of stack space quite quickly.  So the default should be on the heap, but with a flag to specifically put arrays (even of unknown size) on the stack
    * Ted Johnson \- Cray has flags for both behaviors, but there are a lot of flags to control the exact behavior (default is heap for certain use cases, stack for others)
    * Pthreads has a way to change the stack size via a function
    * What about executable stacks and how they factor in?
  * Flang-tidy
    * Meeting with authors has been deferred, will create meeting including Tarun Prabhu
  * [Cross-compilation of real(kind=16)](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/cross-compilation-of-real-kind-16/89161)
    * PR will come out, remaining issues can be resolved via that discussion
  * [\[RFC\] Support \-fstrict-aliasing and \-fno-strict-aliasing](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-support-fstrict-aliasing-and-fno-strict-aliasing/89135)
    * Related issue: [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/171912](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/171912)
    * We can’t do anything reasonable with it without violating the Fortran standard, will leave it open for a little while longer but likely will not support this
  * [Changes to builtin modules](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/changes-to-builtin-modules/89072)
    * PR was reverted due to buildbot failure involving Windows
    * Reviewers asked for big changes, working on a compromise involving putting TODOs in other runtimes
  * [\[RFC\] Add a New Byte Type to LLVM IR](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-a-new-byte-type-to-llvm-ir/89522)
    * Among other things, “Fixes known correctness bugs in memcpy lowering and load merging/widening”. Semantics are different from integer types and may allow other memory optimizations. This is a step towards eventual removal of Undef from LLVM-IR.
    * [Related group working towards a formal specification of LLVM-IR](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-forming-a-working-group-on-formal-specification-for-llvm/89056/4)
  * [\`-ffp-contract=fast\` Violates the Fortran Standard](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/ffp-contract-fast-violates-the-fortran-standard/88897)
    * Reply from the standards committee: [https://mailman.j3-fortran.org/pipermail/j3/2026-January/015531.html](https://mailman.j3-fortran.org/pipermail/j3/2026-January/015531.html)
* PRs of Note
  * Tests from Cray’s CCE internal test suite in llvm-test-suite \[[PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-test-suite/pull/326)\]
    * Proposed directory structure with one test in linked PR
  * [\[Flang\]\[FIR\] Introduce FIRToCoreMLIR pass. \#168703](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/168703)
* Issues of Note
  * gcc warning suppression (Michael Kruse)
    * [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/174918](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/174918)
    * Also see [message](https://flang-compiler.slack.com/archives/C5C58TT32/p1769446659561029) in Slack \#general
* FYI
  * [2026 EuroLLVM Developers' Meeting \- Registration Open\!](https://urldefense.com/v3/__https://discourse.llvm.org/t/2026-eurollvm-developers-meeting-registration-open/89557/1__;!!Bt8fGhp8LhKGRg!A1yd7PA_NA6qkPE3goiI1siQF7mKAnVnpOywFlJBmbQcFXDx25MhAH_tFbBKid5Fgp7F2Plqn6VULBMr0p8X3kyZUxvo58wA$)
  * Call for Mentors \- 2026 EuroLLVM Developers’ Meeting
    * [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/call-for-mentors-2026-eurollvm-developers-meeting/89484/](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/call-for-mentors-2026-eurollvm-developers-meeting/89484/)
    * Google Form here: [EuroLLVM Mentorship Program Application](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfPmzaBfINmdO4ORs8fW5rXTphKaQLfhh45nYFh3IVKS1ZN7w/viewform)
  * [2026 LLVM Community Area Team Elections \- Voting is open\!](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/2026-llvm-community-area-team-elections-voting-is-open/89586)
    * Voting closes Feb 9
  * [LLVM 22.1.0-rc2 Released\!](https://urldefense.com/v3/__https://discourse.llvm.org/t/llvm-22-1-0-rc2-released/89590/1__;!!Bt8fGhp8LhKGRg!ABovo_Sh_W26Vzta9YaGsBfoijc8x9IdZeglz6_12Uk63RPwA3uaPmuiBfK_HAKBfAXkVh4l77XHKKfO9aepSUbPipT5YVix$)
    * The next release will be 22.1.0-rc3 on Tuesday the 10th of Feb
    * Who is writing the [flang release notes](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/release/22.x/flang/docs/ReleaseNotes.md)?
  * [Improvement of Fujitsu test suite](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/improvement-of-fujitsu-test-suite/89475)
  * [\[RFC\] Use pre-compiled headers to speed up LLVM build by \~1.5-2x](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-use-pre-compiled-headers-to-speed-up-llvm-build-by-1-5-2x/89345/24)
    * Related to what has already been done in Flang, attempt to use this approach more generally
  * Added LoopInvariantCodeMotion pass for \[HL\]FIR. (PR \#[173438](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/173438))
* Other topics as time allows
  *

## Details

* Consists of over **721,000** lines of code, documentation, build files, and test
* To date, over **11,703** commits have been made to Flang
