
====================
Availability markups
====================

Libc++ is shipped by various vendors. In particular, it is used as a system library on macOS, iOS and other Apple
platforms. In order for users to be able to compile a binary that is intended to be deployed to an older version of a
platform, Clang provides `availability attributes <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AttributeReference.html#availability>`_.
These attributes can be placed on declarations and are used to describe the life cycle of a symbol in the library.

The main goal is to ensure a compile-time error if a symbol that hasn't been introduced in a previously released library
is used in a program that targets that previously released library. Normally, this would be a load-time error when one
tries to launch the program against the older library.

For example, the filesystem library was introduced in the dylib in LLVM 9. On Apple platforms, this corresponds to
macOS 10.15. If a user compiles on a macOS 10.15 host but targets macOS 10.13 with their program, the compiler would
normally not complain (because the required declarations are in the headers), but the dynamic loader would fail to find
the symbols when actually trying to launch the program on macOS 10.13. To turn this into a compile-time issue instead,
declarations are annotated with when they were introduced, and the compiler can produce a diagnostic if the program
references something that isn't available on the deployment target.


This mechanism is general in nature, and any vendor can add their markup to the library (see below). Whenever a new
feature is added that requires support in the shared library, two macros are added below to allow marking the feature as
unavailable:

1. A macro named ``_LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_HAS_<feature>`` which must be defined to ``_LIBCPP_INTRODUCED_IN_<version>`` for
   the appropriate LLVM version.

2. A macro named ``_LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_<feature>``, which must be defined to ``_LIBCPP_INTRODUCED_IN_<version>_MARKUP``
   for the appropriate LLVM version.

When vendors decide to ship the feature as part of their shared library, they can update the
``_LIBCPP_INTRODUCED_IN_<version>`` macro (and the markup counterpart) based on the platform version they shipped that
version of LLVM in. The library will then use this markup to provide an optimal user experience on these platforms.

Furthermore, many features in the standard library have corresponding feature-test macros. The
``_LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_HAS_<feature>`` macros are checked by the corresponding feature-test macros generated by
``generate_feature_test_macro_components.py`` to ensure that the library doesn't announce a feature as being implemented
if it is unavailable on the deployment target.

Note that this mechanism is disabled by default in the "upstream" libc++. Availability annotations are only meaningful
when shipping libc++ inside a platform (i.e. as a system library), and so vendors that want them should turn those
annotations on at CMake configuration time.
