\input texinfo                  @c -*- Texinfo -*-
@comment %**start of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)
@setfilename libc.info
@settitle The GNU C Library
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c '@codequotebacktick on' and '@codequoteundirected on' require
@c Texinfo 5.0 or later, so use the older equivalent @set variables
@c supported in Texinfo 4.11 and later.
@set txicodequoteundirected
@set txicodequotebacktick

@c setchapternewpage odd

@include macros.texi

@comment Tell install-info what to do.
@dircategory Software libraries
@direntry
* Libc: (libc).                 C library.
@end direntry
@include dir-add.texi

@include pkgvers.texi

@c This tells texinfo.tex to use the real section titles in xrefs in
@c place of the node name, when no section title is explicitly given.
@set xref-automatic-section-title
@c @smallbook
@comment %**end of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)

@c Everything related to printed editions is disabled until we have
@c resolved how to keep them in sync with the master sources of the
@c manual.
@c sold 0.06/1.09, print run out 21may96
@c @set EDITION 0.13
@c @set ISBN 1-882114-55-8

@include version.texi

@set FDL_VERSION 1.3

@copying
This is
@c Disabled (printed editions, see above).
@c Edition @value{EDITION} of
@cite{The GNU C Library Reference Manual}, for version
@ifset PKGVERSION_DEFAULT
@value{VERSION}.
@end ifset
@ifclear PKGVERSION_DEFAULT
@value{VERSION} @value{PKGVERSION}.
@end ifclear

Copyright @copyright{} 1993--2021 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version
@value{FDL_VERSION} or any later version published by the Free
Software Foundation; with the Invariant Sections being ``Free Software
Needs Free Documentation'' and ``GNU Lesser General Public License'',
the Front-Cover texts being ``A GNU Manual'', and with the Back-Cover
Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license is included in the
section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to
copy and modify this GNU manual.  Buying copies from the FSF
supports it in developing GNU and promoting software freedom.''
@end copying

@iftex
@shorttitlepage The GNU C Library Reference Manual
@end iftex
@titlepage
@center @titlefont{The GNU C Library}
@sp 1
@center @titlefont{Reference Manual}
@sp 2
@center Sandra Loosemore
@center with
@center Richard M. Stallman, Roland McGrath, Andrew Oram, and Ulrich Drepper
@sp 3
@c Disabled (printed editions, see above).
@c @center Edition @value{EDITION}
@c @sp 1
@center for version @value{VERSION}
@ifclear PKGVERSION_DEFAULT
@sp 1
@center @value{PKGVERSION}
@end ifclear
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

@c Disabled (printed editions, see above).
@c @sp 2
@c Published by the @uref{https://www.fsf.org/, Free Software Foundation} @*
@c ISBN @value{ISBN} @*

@c Disabled (printed editions, see above).
@c @sp 2
@c Cover art for the Free Software Foundation's printed edition
@c by Etienne Suvasa.

@end titlepage

@c @titlepage is only visible in the printed manual.  Show the
@c copyright information elsewhere in other renderings.  For the HTML
@c version, it should come above the short table of contents.  In the
@c Info manual, the option below is used.
@ifhtml
@insertcopying
@end ifhtml

@shortcontents
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Main Menu
@c Disabled (printed editions, see above).
@ifnothtml
@insertcopying
@end ifnothtml
@end ifnottex

@include top-menu.texi
@include chapters.texi

@node Free Manuals, Copying, Contributors, Top
@appendix Free Software Needs Free Documentation
@include freemanuals.texi

@node Copying, Documentation License, Free Manuals, Top
@appendix GNU Lesser General Public License
@include lgpl-2.1.texi

@node Documentation License, Concept Index, Copying, Top
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@cindex FDL, GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl-@value{FDL_VERSION}.texi

@node Concept Index, Type Index, Documentation License, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@node Type Index, Function Index, Concept Index, Top
@unnumbered Type Index

@printindex tp

@node Function Index, Variable Index, Type Index, Top
@unnumbered Function and Macro Index

@printindex fn

@node Variable Index, File Index, Function Index, Top
@unnumbered Variable and Constant Macro Index

@printindex vr

@node File Index, , Variable Index, Top
@unnumbered Program and File Index

@printindex pg


@bye
